Fitch Downgrades Maranhao's IDRs to 'B'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - São Paulo - 29 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has downgraded the State of Maranhao's (Maranhao) Long-Term Foreign and Local Currency Issuer Default Ratings (IDRs) to 'B' from 'BB-'. The downgrades follow Maranhao's failure to pay principal and interest on its external debt with Bank of America (BofA) on July 24, 2023. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
Fitch has also affirmed Maranhao's Short-Term Foreign and Local Currency IDRs at 'B'. Fitch has downgraded Maranhao's Long-Term National Scale Rating to 'BB+(bra) from 'AA-(bra)' with a Stable Outlook and its Short-Term National Scale Rating to 'B(bra)' from 'F1+(bra)'. Fitch has lowered Maranhao's Standalone Credit Profile (SCP) to 'ccc' from 'bb-'.
The downgrades are due to Maranhao's failure to pay the last installment of its loan with BofA in the amount of USD56.2 million. This failure resulted in activation of the sovereign guarantee on the loan and a subsequent payment by the Brazilian sovereign (BB/Stable). Maranhao's 'ccc' SCP reflects the state's low willingness to pay its debt service in a constrained revenue growth scenario. Maranhao's IDRs benefit from a three-notch uplift from its SCP through ad hoc support because the federal government guarantees approximately 75% of its debt.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Risk Profile: Weaker
The 'Weaker' assessment reflects Fitch's view that there is a high risk of the issuer's ability to cover debt service with the operating balance weakening unexpectedly over the scenario horizon (2023-2027) due to lower revenue, higher expenditure, or an unexpected rise in liabilities or debt-service requirements.
Maranhao's dependency towards federal transfers translates into a 'Weaker' assessment for revenue robustness. The national tax framework with a limited ability to raise rates and a high dependency on a small number of tax payers translates into a 'Weaker' assessment for revenue adjustability. Maranhao has historically reported sound operating margins, with expenditure growth under control, which translates into a 'Midrange' assessment for expenditure sustainability. However, the extensive use of earmarked revenues, high share of staff costs, salary rigidity, and low capex lead to a 'Weaker' assessment for expenditure adjustability. Liabilities & Liquidity robustness is assessed as 'Weaker' due to an underdeveloped credit market for subnational governments in Brazil and the presence of off-balance sheet risks related to pension payments and judicial liabilities (precatórios). Stressed liquidity metrics, as attested by the Capacidade de Pagamento (CAPAG ) liquidity indicator, translate into a 'Weaker' assessment for liabilities and liquidity flexibility.
As of December 2022, external debt totaled BRL1billion, corresponding to 19% of direct debt. The state had a debt contract with BofA that should be fully amortized by July 2023. The amortizations in July 2022 and January 2023 due to BofA were serviced through federal guarantees as compensation for the tax loss associated to the ICMS (Tax on the Circulation of Goods and Services) tax tariff ceiling on fuels and electricity. The compensation was supported by a supreme court decision and was valid until April 2023. For more details see "Brazilian LRG Use of Federal Guarantees for ICMS Will Not Trigger Restricted Defaults" at 'www.fitchratings.com'.
Maranhao failed to pay the last installment of its loan with BofA in July 2023 in the amount of BRL266.42 million for principal plus interests, converted from USD56.2 million. This was despite an accumulated operating balance of BRL2.3 billion as of June 2023, according to data from Siconfi (Sistema de Informações Contábeis e Fiscais do Setor Público Brasileiro).
The missed payment was followed by the activation of the sovereign guarantee and subsequent sovereign payment on July 27, 2023, within the grace period. Since the compensation for the ICMS tax loss was no longer valid, this event constitutes a failure of principal and interest payments by Maranhao. The state also failed to pay principal and interest on the BofA loan in July 2020, making this the second time in three years it resorted to external support to perform debt service.
Maranhao is currently rated 'C' under the CAPAG, which restricts it from taking new loans with a sovereign guarantee. The 'C' score is mainly due to the state's weak liquidity metrics.
Debt Sustainability is assessed at 'aa' and considers an override to the primary metric. Fitch rating case forward looking scenario indicates that the payback ratio (net direct risk to operating balance) - the primary metric of the debt sustainability assessment - will reach an average of 3.8x for the 2025-2027 period, which is aligned with a 'aaa' assessment. The actual debt service coverage ratio - the secondary metric - is projected at 1.5x for the average of 2025-2027, aligned with an 'a' assessment. Fiscal debt burden is projected at 15.3% for the same period. The final 'aa' debt sustainability assessment reflects the two-notch difference between the primary and secondary metrics.
Sovereign Ad Hoc Support: Maranhao's 'B' IDRs benefit from a three-notch uplift from its SCP through ad hoc support because the federal government guarantees approximately 75% of its debt.
ESG Governance - Creditor Rights: Maranhao's recent use of sovereign support to cover its external debt service reflects the breach of legal documentation stating full debt service payments and the state's very low willingness to pay.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
Maranhao's SCP of 'ccc' reflects substantial credit risk, considering the state's low willingness to pay for its debt service without resorting to external support in an environment of constrained revenue growth. The state's Risk Profile is assessed at 'Weaker'. Maranhao's debt sustainability is assessed at 'aa' under Fitch's rating case. A 'Weaker' Risk Profile coupled with a debt sustainability score of 'aa' would typically lead to an SCP in the 'bb' category.
However, Fitch is also factoring in the recent failure of payment as an issuer-specific key rating driver, as per the local and regional governments (LRG) master criteria. Maranhao's IDR of 'B' benefits from a three-notches uplift from its SCP through ad hoc support, considering that the federal government guarantees approximately 75% of its debt. Its national scale rating of 'BB+(bra)' is based on the national ratings correspondence table and a national peer comparison.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Maranhao's Long-Term IDRs could be upgraded if Fitch perception of the state's willingness to service debt in a timely manner and without federal support improves.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Maranhao's IDRs could be downgraded if Fitch's perception of federal support to service guaranteed debt weakens;
--Maranhao's IDRs could be downgraded if the share of federal guaranteed debt to total direct debt decreases substantially;
--Maranhao's SCP could be downgraded if Fitch's perception that the state may fail to pay principal and interests without external support in the following 12- to 24-month period deteriorates.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
ISSUER PROFILE
Fitch classifies Maranhao as a Type B LRG, which is required to cover debt service from cash flow on an annual basis. Maranhao is home to roughly seven million people or 3% of Brazil's population. The state's revenue sources are strongly influenced by transfers from the national government. The main spending responsibilities cover education, healthcare and law enforcement. According to budgetary regulations, Maranhao has the right to borrow on the domestic market and externally, subject to federal government approval. Maranhao's per capita GDP is equivalent to 42% of national per capita GDP.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Fitch raised Maranhao's ESG Score for Governance - Creditor Rights to '5' from '3' due to the recent use of sovereign support to cover its external debt service, which reflects the breach of legal documentation stating full debt service payments and the very low willingness to pay. This has a negative impact on the credit profile and is highly relevant to the rating, resulting in an implicitly lower rating.
Fitch raised Maranhao's ESG Score for Governance - Rule of Law, Institutional & Regulatory Quality, Control of Corruption to '4' from '3' because the government's effectiveness and institutional and regulatory quality were not sufficient to prevent the state from resorting to external financial support. This has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the rating in conjunction with other factors.
Maranhao has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Population Demographics due to the negative weight the state's poverty rate has on its revenue raising ability and the pressing demand for expenditures in health, education and other social services. This has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the ratings in conjunction with other factors.
Maranhao has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Human Development, Health and Education due to its Human Development Index (calculated as a geometric average of health, education and income), which is close to the bottom of the ranking among Brazilian states. This has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the ratings in conjunction with other factors.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Maranhao, State of
LT IDRB Downgrade
BB- 
ST IDRB Affirmed
B 
LC LT IDRB Downgrade
BB- 
LC ST IDRB Affirmed
B 
Natl LTBB+(bra) Downgrade
AA-(bra) 
Natl STB(bra) Downgrade
F1+(bra) 
