Fitch Revises Buckner Retirement Services (TX) Outlook to Negative; Affirms Revs at 'A'

Fitch Ratings - Austin - 08 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has revised the Rating Outlook for Buckner Retirement Services' (BRS) to Negative from Stable. Fitch has additionally affirmed BRS' Issuer Default Rating (IDR) at 'A'. Fitch has also affirmed the rating on the series 2016A, 2016B and 2017 revenue bonds issued by the Tarrant County Cultural Education Facilities Finance Corporation (the Corporation) on behalf of BRS obligated group (OG) at 'A'.
The Outlook revision to Negative is driven by BRS OG's labor expense pressures and persistent occupancy challenges that have led to thin operating performance. Unfavorable operating profitability has led BRS OG to fail to achieve a historical debt service coverage ratio of 1x (coverage violation) in 2021 and 2022. Under the terms of the master trust indenture, the coverage violations do not constitute an event of default as long as Buckner Foundation's (BF) unrestricted net assets relative to the long-term debt of BF (including other the guarantees beyond BRS) is above 75% (Foundation Asset Level Requirement).
The Foundation Asset Level Requirement stood at 250% at YE 2022 and therefore, BRS OG was only required to submit a management report. Fitch expects BRS OG's historical debt service coverage ratio to be above the required level in 2023 as $6.7 million in distributions from BF have provided a temporary boost to revenues, leading to a historical debt service coverage ratio of nearly 3.5x in 1Q23. Excluding the distribution from BF, Fitch estimates that BRS OG's MADS coverage would have been only 0.5x in 1Q23.
The 'A' rating continues to reflect the credit strength of the Credit and Support Agreement (CSA) between BF and BRS OG, under which BF guarantees timely payment of principal and interest on BRS OG's debt. As a result of the financial support of the CSA, Fitch's financial profile assessment and ratings place less emphasis on maximum annual debt service (MADS) coverage, given that the unrestricted liquidity of BF is pledged to pay yearly debt service. As of YE 2022, BF had $361.6 million in unrestricted net assets.
Fitch's assessment of BRS OG's financial profile includes the BF's unrestricted net assets, net of other BF guarantees ($17 million at YE 2022). BRS OG' cash-to-adjusted debt, including the aforementioned funds from BF, translated to 246.3% as of YE 2022, supporting BRS OG's current 'a' financial profile assessment.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Buckner Retirement Services, Inc. (TX)
LT IDRA Affirmed
A 
Buckner Retirement Services, Inc. (TX) /General Revenues/1 LT
LTA Affirmed
A 
