Fitch Downgrades Southwest Gas Corp.'s IDR to 'BBB+'/Stable; Southwest Gas Hldgs Remains on RWN

Fitch Ratings - New York - 15 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has downgraded Southwest Gas Corporation's (SWG) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'BBB+' from 'A-' and removed it from Rating Watch Negative (RWN). Fitch has also affirmed SWG's Short-Term IDR at 'F2'. The Rating Outlook is Stable. Fitch has also downgraded SWG's senior unsecured debt to 'A-' from 'A'. Fitch is maintaining the ratings of Southwest Gas Holdings, Inc. (SWX) on Rating Watch Negative, pending greater clarity regarding the announced Centuri spin-off. SWX's Long-Term IDR is 'BBB.' SWX is the ultimate parent of wholly-owned, gas distribution operating utility, Southwest Gas Corp.
Fitch has also affirmed the $50 million Clark County, NV industrial revenue development bonds series 2003A at 'AA-'/'F1+', based on an irrevocable direct-pay LOC provided by Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. (WFB; AA-/F1+).
The credit rating downgrade at SWG reflects leverage at the utility in excess of Fitch's downgrade threshold throughout the forecast period. The Stable Outlook for SWG reflects solid credit metrics and Fitch's expectation that a one-notch downgrade at SWX would not result in a downgrade at SWG under Fitch's parent-subsidiary linkage criteria.
The continuation of corporate parent, SWX, on RWN reflects continued uncertainty regarding the pending Centuri spin-off. Fitch expects to resolve the RWN once it has greater clarity regarding the structure of the spin-off, SWX's plan to provide incremental capital to Centuri and the impact on SWX's consolidated leverage. SWX has stated publicly it is considering $300 million of capital support to right-size Centuri's balance sheet, potentially increasing holding company leverage.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
SWX
Spin-Off May Increase Leverage: Fitch's listing of SWX on RWN reflects concern that a potentially greater than expected, debt financed capital infusion by SWX into Centuri would result in projected consolidated leverage consistently above the agency's negative sensitivity threshold post spin-off. Fitch believes the spin-off of Centuri into a separate, publicly traded entity is credit enhancing to the degree it improves the holding company's business risk profile. Absent additional debt issuance, Fitch would expect to stabilize the ratings following completion of the spin-off to shareholders.
Management has indicated current leverage at Centuri is too high compared to its peers and is assessing means of support to properly capitalize Centuri prior to completion of the spin-off. At this point, it is not clear whether the support would come from debt issued at SWX or a potential third-party financing. Management had recently stated that the spin-off will not be supported by additional equity issued at SWX. The tax- free spin-off of Centuri, SWX's non-regulated infrastructure business, is expected to be completed around the end of this year pending regulatory agency approvals. Fitch believes an outright sale of the business by SWX is unlikely since that would have adverse tax consequences.
Improving Business Risk Profile: Fitch expects the pending spinoff to improve the holding company's business risk profile, with SWX emerging from the restructuring a pure utility holding company, its sole source of earnings and cash flows from a fully regulated, relatively low risk natural gas distribution business. Following the spinoff, SWG (BBB+/Stable) is expected by Fitch to account for virtually all of SWX's consolidated EBITDA. SWG benefits from above-average customer growth of 1.7% annually and relatively balanced rate regulation across its three-state service territory encompassing parts of Arizona, Nevada and California. Approximately 60% of SWX's consolidated EBITDA was provided by SWG in 2022, moving to 100% post-spin.
Post-Spin Capital Structure Key: Leverage at SWX is expected to improve meaningfully in 2023 on the heels of the MountainWest Pipelines Holding Company divestiture completed in February 2023. Proceeds from the divestiture were used to repay approximately $1.2 billion of holding company debt borrowed to fund the acquisition of the pipeline holding company. As SWX transitions to a pure-play utility, Fitch estimates SWX's FFO leverage will improve to 5.6x in 2023 from more than 7x in 2022. However, issuance of incremental holding company debt to support the Centuri spin-off could push SWX leverage above our downgrade threshold, triggering a future one-notch downgrade.
Regulatory Authorization Update: In a constructive development, SWX received approval from the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) to divest its ownership interest in and separate from Centuri. With this accomplished, no further state regulatory approvals are needed to finalize the Centuri spin-off. Management also announced in June 2023 that it filed its initial confidential draft Registration Statement on Form 10 with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
The chief, remaining regulatory gating items for the spin-off include receipt of an Internal Revenue Service private letter ruling supporting the tax-free status of the transaction and completion of the SEC's review and effectiveness of Form 10. Final approval of SWG's board of directors is also required. The spin-off is expected to be finalized by the end of 1Q24.
Improving Results at Centuri: LTM June 2023 operating results at Centuri improved following a challenging FY22. In 2022, financial results at Centuri were depressed by inflationary pressures and sluggish business trends versus 2021. Less emergency storm restoration service work in 2022 and reduced volume due to supply chain challenges combined with inflationary pressures on fuel and subcontractor expenses resulted in lower than expected results. Leverage in 2022 was around 5.0x (debt/EBITDA), versus previous expectations of around 3.5x-4x.
LTM June 30, 2023, adjusted EBITDA rose 30% to $284.6 million from $219.3 million for the same time period in 2022, driven by a better mix of business, including strong results in its off-shore wind and storm restoration service operations. At the end of 2Q23, Centuri had approximately $1.2 billion of debt outstanding that will be eliminated from SWX's balance sheet with completion of the spinoff.
MountainWest Sale Credit Positive: Fitch believes the February 2023 sale of MountainWest, which removed approximately $1.1 billion of parent debt issued to fund the 2021 acquisition, is a credit-supportive development notwithstanding loss of diversification benefits from ownership of the pipeline company. Ownership of MountainWest, in Fitch's analysis, provided a stable and predictable source of earnings and cash flow as well as regulatory diversification away from Arizona and Nevada.
Parent-Subsidiary Linkage: Parent subsidiary linkage exists between SWX and SWG. Fitch determines SWX's standalone credit profile based upon consolidated metrics. Fitch has followed the stronger subsidiary path under Fitch's parent and subsidiary rating criteria as we consider SWG to have a stronger credit profile on a standalone basis. Legal ring fencing for SWG is porous given the general protections afforded by regulatory capital structure and other restrictions. Access and control are also porous.
SWX manages the treasury function for SWG and is the sole source of equity. SWG issues its own short-term and long-term debt. SWX does not guarantee SWG's debt. Based on Fitch's parent and subsidiary rating criteria, IDR differences between SWX and SWG is limited to two notches.
SWG
Elevated Leverage Triggers Downgrade: Fitch projects SWG leverage will approximate 5.2x in 2023 and 5.0x in 2024 levels well-above Fitch's 4.8x rating downgrade sensitivity and more consistent 'BBB+' creditworthiness, in Fitch's view. Projected SWG FFO leverage of approximately 5x in 2023 and 2024 compares to a range of 5.9x to 6.6x during 2020 to 2022. The anticipated improvement in leverage reflects SWX's April 2023 equity contribution of approximately $550 million to SWG, balanced outcomes in SWG's most recent base rate proceedings in Arizona and Nevada, expectations of continued solid customer growth and credit supportive outcomes in future base rate case proceedings.
Historic weakness in SWG's credit metrics 2020-2022 reflect funding costs related to sharply higher natural gas costs in 2022, costs associated with the utility's elevated capital program coupled regulatory lag and the negative effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
Solid Utility Growth Prospects: As mentioned above, SWG benefits from above-average customer growth of approximately 1.5%-2.0% annually and relatively balanced rate regulation across its three-state service territory encompassing parts of Arizona, Nevada and California. SWG's large capital investment program was recently increased to $2 billion 2023-2025, underscoring the importance of timely rate recovery, and is expected to support rate base growth of 5%-7% over the next three years. Fitch believes the recent ACC decision in SWG's PGA filing is a credit supportive development that will result in relatively timely cash recovery of deferred gas costs over 18-months.
Low-Risk Regulatory Environment: SWG's ratings reflect the low-risk profile of its regulated gas utility business. The utility benefits from relatively balanced regulation across its jurisdictional service territory and modest regulatory diversification. Regulators have approved revenue decoupling mechanisms for SWG's residential and small commercial customers, representing approximately 85% of operating margin and 99% of customers, along with purchased gas adjustment and infrastructure cost recovery mechanisms throughout its service territory.
Fitch believes these rate mechanisms enhance earnings and cash flow stability and predictability, providing more timely cost recovery, all else equal, and improve SWG's opportunity to earn its authorized returns. However, rate case filings in Arizona and Nevada are based on historical test years and Arizona rate cases can take more than a year to be resolved, impeding the utility's ability to earn its authorized ROEs. Allowed ROEs have been below industry averages in Arizona and Nevada in recent rate case decisions.
Regulatory Update: In January 2023, the Arizona Corporation Commission (ACC) issued a final decision in SWG's base rate case, which was filed in December 2021 to recover capital investment and other costs not reflected in rates. SWG's filing requested a $90.7 million rate increase based on a 9.9% ROE and a 51% equity component of capitalization.
The final ACC decision adopted settlement of several issues reached by the company with the Utilities Division Staff and the Residential Utility Consumer Office and is, in Fitch's view, a constructive development from a credit perspective. The ACC order approved a $54.3 million rate increase based on a 9.30% authorized ROE and a 50% equity ratio. The rate increase granted by the commission represents approximately 60% of the utility's requested amount.
Similarly, SWG's last base rate case in Nevada was settled in what Fitch believes is a constructive resolution of the proceeding. The Nevada Public Utilities Commission approved the proposed rate case settlement authorizing a $14 million rate increase. The rate increase is based on a 9.4% authorized ROE and a 50% target equity ratio and was effective April 1, 2022. The $14 million rate increase authorized in the instant rate case represents roughly 53% of SWG's initial rate increase request.
Commodity Cost Deferrals: At the end of 2Q23, SWG under-collections of gas commodity supply costs relative to amounts reflected in rates totaled $786 million down from $970 million at the end of 1Q23, but more than two times 2Q22 levels of $355 million. The YOY increase was driven by a prolonged period of high natural gas prices in the U.S. West due to several factors including historically low gas storage levels, transmission pipeline availability issues and cold winter weather.
Under-collections are recoverable through the utility's jurisdictional purchase gas adjustment (PGA) mechanisms with SWG funding the large deferred balances. In April 2023, SWG used proceeds from an equity infusion from its corporate parent to repay amounts borrowed under the utility's $450 million term loan earlier in the year to fund elevated gas commodity costs.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
SWX
SWX is weaker positioned compared to peers, DTE Energy (BBB/Stable), WEC Energy (BBB+/Stable) and MDU Resources Group (BBB+/Stable). Like DTE Energy, WEC and MDU, SWX is a regulated parent holding company with utility subsidiary ratings in the 'A' and 'BBB' categories, operating in balanced regulatory environments. MDU, and SWX, own significant, unregulated infrastructure businesses. SWX's and MDU's unregulated construction operations account for roughly 30% of consolidated EBITDA in 2022 and are in the process of divesting those businesses with an eye toward emerging from ongoing asset rationalizations as fully regulated utility holding companies.
Following the anticipated Centuri spinoff, SWX will become a holding company owning a fully regulated, relatively low-risk natural gas distribution utility, with operations in three states. SWX's post-restructuring credit profile compares favorably with peers WEC and MDU integrated utility operations which, in Fitch's estimation, entail greater operating risks compared to pure gas T&D utilities. These concerns are offset by more diverse operations at WEC and MDU, which operate across respective four- and eight-state service territories. DTE is a single-state utility with operations solely serving parts of Michigan.
SWG
SWG is well-positioned relative to 'BBB+' rated peer DTE Gas Company (BBB+/Stable) and more weakly positioned compared to New Jersey Natural Gas Co. (NJNG; A-/Stable) and UGI Utilities, Inc. (UGIU; A-/Stable). SWG is considerably larger than UGUI and NJNG with average 2022-2024 EBITDA approximating $665 million for SWG compared to $449 million for UGI and just $314 million for NJNG. DTE Gas is comparable in size to SWG based on average 2022-2024 EBITDA of $658 million. Similar to SWG, regulatory jurisdictions are generally balanced and credit supportive for UGI, DTE Gas and NJNG.
Of the four peer gas distribution utilities only SWG operates in more than one state, providing gas distribution services in Arizona, Nevada and California. UGI, DTE Gas and NJNG are single-state utilities serving parts of Pennsylvania, Michigan and New Jersey, respectively. SWG, UGUI, DTE Gas and NJNG have above-industry-average customer growth. Similar to its peers, SWG benefits from automatic recovery mechanisms, such as revenue decoupling, purchased gas costs adjustment and infrastructure recovery mechanisms throughout its service territory.
SWG also benefits from regulatory diversity, operating under three state jurisdictions versus its single-state peers. While UGUI revenues are not decoupled, several riders ensure recovery of large costs beyond the utility's control outside of base rate proceedings and recently adopted a weather normalization recovery mechanism.
SWG's FFO leverage is weaker than its higher rated peers UGIU and NJNG. UGI's and NJNG's average FFO leverage in 2023-2024 was 4.1x and 4.5x, respectively, considerably lower than SWG's 5.1x average over the same time period. Leverage at SWG is comparable with, though somewhat weaker than similarly rated DTE Gas's 4.8x FFO leverage on average during 2023-2024.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
--Customer growth at SWG averaging around a 1.7% CAGR;
--SWG capital program of around $2 billion over 2023-2025;
--In Arizona and Nevada new rates in effect based on the last rate case approval.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
SWX
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Although a rating upgrade is unlikely at this time due to elevated leverage, FFO leverage sustained below 5.0x following the spin-off, could result in a positive rating action.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to a Stabilization of Ratings.
--FFO leverage expected to remain less than 5.8x on a sustained basis, following the spin-off of Centuri could lead to stabilization of ratings.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Significant deterioration of the regulatory environment in Arizona or Nevada;
--FFO leverage exceeding 5.8x on a sustained basis following the spin-off of Centuri.
SWG
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Sustained FFO leverage below 4.0x and continued balanced rate regulation across SWG's jurisdictional service territory.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Significant deterioration of the regulatory environment in Arizona or Nevada;
--FFO leverage exceeding 5.0x on a sustained basis;
--While not anticipated, a greater than one-notch downgrade of corporate parent SWX would result in a credit rating downgrade at SWG.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Liquidity: At the end of 2Q23, SWX had cash and cash equivalents of $221 million and approximately $284.5 million of available borrowing capacity on its $300 million revolving credit facility. In December 2022, SWX amended facility and increasing its borrowing capacity to $300 million from $200 million and extending the maturity to December 2026. As of Jun. 30, 2023, SWX had $15.5 million in borrowings outstanding under the credit facility.
During the first quarter of 2023, SWX issued 4.1 million shares of common stock receiving net proceeds of $238 million and, in April 2024, signed a new $550 million term loan credit agreement that matures in October 2024 to fund the higher than expected natural gas cost incurred at SWG during November 2022-March 2023 winter period. The majority of the proceeds from the term loan were contributed by SWX to SWG.
SWX financed MountainWest acquisition by a combination of about $400 million of equity, issuance of around $1.2 billion of parent debt and the assumption of $430 million of Questar debt. At the announcement of the transaction in October 2021, SWX obtained a committed $1.6 billion 364-day term loan that was used initially to fund the transaction before permanent financing is put in place. There was $1.15 billion outstanding under this Term Loan Facility as of Dec. 31, 2022. Upon the close of the MountainWest sale (Feb. 14, 2023), the Company paid down $1.075 billion, resulting in an outstanding balance of $72 million as of the date of closing the sale which has been repaid.
As of June 30, 2023, SWG had a $400 million credit facility scheduled to expire June 2024. Southwest designates $150 million of the facility for long-term borrowing needs and the remaining $250 million for working capital purposes. At the end of 2Q23 there were no borrowings outstanding under the credit facility and SWG had $193 million of cash and cash equivalents on its balance sheet. On April 17, 2023, SWG used the proceeds from the equity contribution from SWX to repay the amount outstanding and retire its $450 million 365-day term loan used to finance purchase gas costs in full.
The remainder of the equity contribution from SWX was used for working capital and general corporate purposes. In addition to its credit facility, SWG relies on internal cash generation, equity contributions from its corporate parent and has access to debt capital markets to meet its funding requirements. Management expects internal cash generation to fund approximately 65%-70% of its planned $2 billion 2022-2025 capex program.
Centuri is self-funding. As of June 30, 2023, there was approximately $1 billion outstanding under a secured, multi-currency term loan B outstanding which matures in 2028 and a $400 million secured credit facility scheduled to expire in 2026. At the end of 2Q23 there was $184.3 million borrowed under the secured credit facility. The debt at Centuri will be separated from SWX with completion of the spin-off.
ISSUER PROFILE
SWX is a holding company headquartered in Nevada. Its principle operating subsidiary is SWG, a regulated natural gas distribution utility with operations in Arizona, Nevada and California. SWX also owns Centuri, a full-service infrastructure contractor.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Southwest Gas Corporation
LT IDRBBB+ Downgrade
A- 
ST IDRF2 Affirmed
F2 
structured
LTAA- Affirmed
AA- 
senior unsecured
LTA- Downgrade
A 
structured
STF1+ Affirmed
F1+ 
senior unsecured
STF2 Affirmed
F2 
structured
ULTA Affirmed
A 
Southwest Gas Holdings, Inc.
LT IDRBBB Rating Watch Maintained
BBB 
