Fitch Revises UGI Utilities Rating Outlook to Negative; Affirms 'A-' IDR

Fitch Ratings - New York - 14 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed UGI Utilities, Inc.'s (UGIU) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) at 'A-'. The Rating Outlook has been revised to Negative from Stable.
The revised Outlook reflects linkage with corporate parent, UGI Corporation (UGI; not rated). Fitch believes unabated or worsening challenges at UGI's unregulated operations could lead to adverse credit rating action at UGIU in the coming 18 months-24 months under Fitch's parent and subsidiary rating linkage criteria.
UGIU's ratings are supported by the relatively low-risk business profile of its regulated, predominantly natural gas distribution operations, supportive regulation in Pennsylvania, healthy customer growth and solid FFO leverage for its rating category. FFO leverage is expected by Fitch to approximate 4.2x and 4.0x in 2023 and 2024, respectively, versus 3.8x in 2022, well-below the utility's 4.5x downgrade sensitivity and consistent with UGIU's current IDR.
In a constructive development from a credit perspective, Pennsylvania regulators approved a settlement of UGIU's natural gas base rate case, including a $49 million rate increase and authorization of a pilot weather normalization adjustment (WNA) rider in an order issued September 2022.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Low Business Risk Profile: UGIU exhibits a low-risk business profile consisting of regulated natural gas and electric distribution operations. Over 95% of operating income is derived from UGIU's natural gas distribution segment with the remainder from the electric segment. UGIU has made significant progress modernizing its pipeline infrastructure, reducing operating risk. Approximately 92% of UGIU's gas mains are comprised of contemporary plastic and coated steel pipes, with 7% bare steel and 1% cast iron pipes. Cast iron pipes are expected to be fully replaced by March 2027, and bare steel pipes by September 2041.
Supportive Regulation: Fitch believes Pennsylvania utility regulation is constructive from a credit perspective. Utilities include fully projected test years in general rate cases. UGIU's natural gas distribution utility is eligible for pipe replacement ratemaking recovery between rate cases under the Distribution System Improvement Charge (DSIC). For the purposes of calculating quarterly adjustments to revenue collected under the DSIC, UGIU is allowed a 10.2% ROE. The utility also receives timely recovery of investments under the Growth Extension Tariff (GET Gas) program. Natural gas costs are passed through to customers via a purchased gas cost (PGC) tariff.
Recent Regulatory Developments: In a constructive development from a credit perspective, UGIU received a final order from the PAPUC authorizing a $49 million annual rate increase to be phased-in via an initial $38 million annual increase that went into effect Oct. 29, 2022 and an $11 million annual rate increase effective Oct. 1, 2023. The rate increase represents approximately 59% of the company's annual revenue increase request as originally filed. UGIU filed the rate case in January 2022, supporting an $83 million rate hike based on an 11.20% ROE a 55.1% equity ratio and a test YE Sept. 30, 2023.
The commission order, issued in September 2022, also approved a WNA rider pilot program, authorized implementation of a DSIC and prohibits the company from filing another rate case until Jan. 1, 2024. In addition, UGIU's electric utility filed a settlement in its electric base rate case with the PAPUC. If approved, the settlement would result in a base rate increase of $8.5 million. Fitch believes the settlement, if finalized would be a credit supportive development.
Weather Normalization Rider: The WNA rider is being implemented as a five-year pilot program beginning Nov. 1, 2022. Over the past several years, weather in UGIU's service territory has been warmer than normal which has negatively impacted utility volumes. In the winter of 2022-2023, implementation of the WNA was a significant offset to lower billings resulting from mild winter weather. Under the PAPUC approved WNA, residential and small commercial customer billings for distribution services are adjusted (monthly) for weather related impacts exceeding the 3% threshold.
Healthy Customer Growth: UGIU added, on average, approximately 12,000 new gas heating customers annually over the past five years. Over the past decade, UGIU compound annual customer growth rate was approximately 1.5%. Customer growth at UGIU is driven primarily by conversions from oil- and electric-based heating systems to natural gas and new home. UGIU sources approximately 99% of its gas from the Marcellus Shale, which is one of the most abundant natural gas producing formations.
Large Capex Program: Capex totaled $463 million in 2022, an 18% increase from $392 million in 2021. Management expects capex to increase and additional 8% in 2023 to approximately $500 million in 2023. The relatively high level of capex is driven by expected growth and system betterment investment. Roughly 90% of planned investment is expected to be recovered within 12 months. Since 2012, pipeline replacement and betterment investment has increased the 12,500-mile pipeline system's percentage of contemporary materials to 92% from 85%, with the remaining 8% and 15%, respectively, composed of bare steel or cast-iron pipe.
Credit Metrics Consistent with Rating: UGIU's financial profile is supported by a conservative capital structure and low leverage. FFO leverage was 3.8x in 2022 and is projected by Fitch to approximate 4.2x in 2023 and 4.0x in 2024. While projected leverage drifts above 4.0x in 2023, based on Fitch's projections, FFO leverage remains well-below the agency's downgrade threshold of 4.5x, underscoring UGIU's strong credit profile when considered with the utility's relatively low business risk profile and balance regulatory environment.
Parent/Subsidiary Linkage: There is a parent subsidiary relationship between UGIU and its owner, UGI Corporation (UGI Corp.; not rated). Fitch believes UGIU has a stronger standalone credit profile (SCP) than UGI Corp. given the utility's relatively low business risk profile, solid cash flows and credit supportive rate regulation. Fitch has followed the weak parent/stronger subsidiary path provided under its parent and subsidiary linkage criteria.
Legal ring-fencing is porous, given the general protections afforded by regulatory oversight which include capital structure and dividend restrictions. Access and control are also porous. UGI Corp. is dependent on cash distributions from its subsidiaries, including UGIU, to meet its obligations and is the only source of equity for UGIU. Incremental pressure on UGI's non-utility operations could impact UGIU creditworthiness in the near- to intermediate-term. UGIU has direct access to capital markets and is managed separately from UGI Corp.'s other subsidiaries.
West Reading Explosion Investigation: On March 24, 2023, an explosion occurred in West Reading, Pennsylvania which resulted in seven fatalities, significant injuries to eleven others, and extensive property damage in an area served by UGIU. While an investigation is underway into the disaster, the cause of the explosion has not yet been determined. Claims have been filed against UGIU and the utility is involved in lawsuits in connection with the West Reading explosion.
Fitch believes the explosion and related litigation is a nascent source of uncertainty from a credit perspective, pending future developments. Fitch notes the company is cooperating with the investigation and has insurance to cover potential third-party exposure, if any. Fitch believes potential exposure to the company related to the West Reading explosion is manageable within UGIU's current rating category.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
UGIU is well-positioned relative to its similarly rated peers Southwest Gas Corporation (SWG; A-/Stable) and DTE Gas Company (DTE Gas; BBB+/Stable). UGIU enjoys a constructive regulatory environment in Pennsylvania, similar to SWG and DTE Gas. UGIU and DTE Gas operate primarily in one state, whereas SWG has somewhat greater geographic diversity, operating in Arizona, Nevada and California. Unlike SWG and DTE Gas, UGIU does not have revenue decoupling.
However, Pennsylvania regulators, in a constructive development, approved a weather normalization adjustment rider in UGIU's last base rate case. UGIU's FFO leverage is expected to approximate 4.2x in 2023, which compares with an estimated 5x each for SWG and DTE Gas.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
Fitch's Key Assumptions Within the Rating Case for the Issuer:
--Customer growth CAGR of approximately 1.5%;
--Capex totals $500 million in 2023;
--Continued utilization of the DSIC mechanism to timely recover pipeline replacement and system betterment investment;
--Implementation of weather normalization adjustment mechanism as approved in the commission's September 2022 order in UGIU's base rate case.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Given the sizable multiyear capital investment program, positive rating actions are not likely at this time. Nevertheless, if FFO leverage is below 3.5x on a sustained basis, UGIU could be upgraded;
--Reduction in EBITDA leverage to UGI Corp.'s publicly stated 3.0x-3.5x target level.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--A sustained weakening of FFO leverage in excess of 4.5x;
--Significant, unexpected deterioration in rate regulation;
--Meaningful deterioration in parent UGI Corp.'s SCP.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Liquidity: As of June 30, 2023, UGIU had $317 million of available borrowing capacity after consideration of $108 million drawn on its revolving credit facility (RCF), which matures in June 2024. The utility also has $130 million of term loan debt as of June 30, 2023.
UGIU is expected to be cash flow negative 2023-2024 owing, in large part, to its elevated capex program. The utility's $425 million RCF provides adequate liquidity in Fitch's view along with access to debt capital markets and equity infusions as needed from its corporate parent, UGI Corp. Since UGIU is a relatively small debt issuer, it does not issue index-eligible paper and utilizes bank lending and private placement for much of its long-term funding requirements.
In addition to its large capex program, UGIU has seasonal liquidity needs to manage inventory ahead of, and carry customer receivables during, the winter heating season. We believe UGIU's bank lines provide sufficient capacity to meet working capital needs. Peak borrowings generally occur early in the winter heating season when UGIU's investment in working capital is greatest. Scheduled long-term debt maturities are manageable, in Fitch's opinion, with approximately $6 million-$7 million of long-term debt due 2023-2025 and $281 million in 2026.
ISSUER PROFILE
UGI Utilities provides natural gas and electric distribution services in parts of Pennsylvania. The utility's gas LDC accounts for approximately 95% of operating income with electric distribution representing the remainder.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
UGI Utilities, Inc.
LT IDRA- Affirmed
A- 
senior unsecured
LTA Affirmed
A 
