Fitch Places Capri's Ratings on Rating Watch Negative Following Tapestry Acquisition Proposal

Fitch Ratings - New York - 11 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has placed all of Capri Holdings Limited's (Capri), Michael Kors (USA), Inc.'s and Gianni Versace S.r.l.'s ratings, including the Long-Term (LT) Issuer Default Rating (IDR) of 'BBB-', on Rating Watch Negative (RWN) following a definitive agreement to be acquired by Tapestry Inc. (NYSE: TPR) for approximately USD8.5 billion, or 9.0x the USD950 million EBITDA reported for the TTM period ended July 1, 2023. The acquisition is expected to close during calendar 2024, following shareholder and regulatory approval. The RWN reflects the potential that EBITDAR leverage for the combined company could be in the low-4x range beyond 12 to 24 months post acquisition close versus Fitch's expectations for Capri's standalone credit profile that EBITDAR leverage will be sustained in the low-3x range over the medium term. Given the expected close timeline, the RWN may take over six months to resolve.
Capri's current 'BBB-' LT IDR reflects its strong positioning and good growth in the U.S. handbag market, and the fashion risk inherent in the apparel and accessories industry.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Proposed Acquisition by Tapestry Inc.: Tapestry Inc. announced on Aug. 10, 2023 an agreement to acquire Capri for an enterprise value of USD8.5 billion, including Capri's approximately USD1.6 billion of outstanding net debt. The offer price is USD57.00/share, representing a 59% premium to the 30-day volume weighted average price ending Aug. 9, 2023. The transaction will be funded with debt and some usage of Tapestry cash (USD652 million on hand as of April 1, 2023); the company has secured an USD8.0 billion bridge financing facility from a banking consortium. On a TTM basis, as of April 1, 2023, the combined business generated over USD12.0 billion in annual sales and around USD2.7 billion in EBITDA.
Fitch acknowledges that post-close, the credit profile of the combined business could benefit from its increased scale and greater brand, product, and geographic diversification. Pro forma, the business will consist of six brands including Tapestry brands Coach, Kate Spade, and Stuart Weitzman and Capri brands Michael Kors, Versace, and Jimmy Choo. Tapestry is targeting over USD200 million in cost synergies within three years post-closing and the company has announced a long-term debt/EBITDA target of below 2.5x. which equates to approximately 4.0x on a Fitch adjusted EBITDAR leverage basis (capitalizing leases at 8x).
The below Key Rating Drivers represent the standalone credit profile for Capri Holdings Limited—
Focused Strategy Supports Growth: Capri's strategic initiatives across its portfolio help support Fitch's expectations of low-single digit revenue growth beginning in fiscal 2025. Leading up to the pandemic, the Michael Kors brand experienced some challenges with revenue falling from USD4.7 billion in fiscal 2016 (ending March 2016) to USD4.35 billion in calendar 2019. Fitch believes that some of these challenges were macro-driven, including reduced interest in fashion and increased industry markdown levels. Since this period, management has taken several initiatives at the brand including, pulling back on its wholesale exposure, closing underperforming stores, and shifting its product assortment to higher price points.
At Jimmy Choo and Versace, management has been focused on growing the brands and leaning into underpenetrated categories. At Jimmy Choo, this includes the accessories and casual footwear categories. At Versace, this has centered around accessories, footwear and men's wear. Despite a more challenging macro, Fitch expects continued growth at Versace and Jimmy Choo in the near term. This growth is expected to offset potential topline declines at Michael Kors as the brand could be more impacted by near-term macro uncertainty.
Strong Financial Flexibility: Capri's financial flexibility is supported by its good FCF, which has averaged around USD570 million over the last four years, access to its USD1.5 billion revolver and reasonable levels of cash. Capri has historically utilized its FCF generation for debt repayment, share repurchases, and business investment. Through cash flow repayment, Capri's debt levels declined from USD2.6 billion at the end of fiscal 2019 to USD1.1 billion at the end of fiscal 2022.
In 2023, the company borrowed approximately USD700 million in incremental debt to support an increase in share buybacks, lifting EBITDAR leverage to the mid-3x. Longer term, on a standalone basis, Fitch would expect Capri to resume its practice of debt reduction to support its 'BBB-' ratings.
Acquisitive Posture: Capri's portfolio has evolved via acquisitions in recent years, somewhat benefiting its credit profile through diversification. In November 2017, the company purchased luxury shoe and accessory maker Jimmy Choo PLC for USD1.35 billion, or 16.5x EV/EBITDA (based on Fitch-defined EBITDA for the 12-month period ending June 30, 2017) which it financed with USD1 billion of unsecured term loans (later repaid) and USD450 million in unsecured notes. On Dec. 31, 2018, Capri purchased Gianni Versace S.p.A., an independently operated luxury goods company, for USD2 billion (valuation unavailable given a lack of financial information on the asset). Capri Holdings partially financed the purchase of Versace with USD1.6 billion in unsecured term loans. By July 2022, Capri had fully repaid all outstanding borrowings on the USD1.6 billion term loans.
The Jimmy Choo acquisition increased Capri's revenue penetration of women's shoes, while the Versace brand increased Capri's exposure to the apparel category and to male customers. Both of these brands have European heritages and given their international penetration reduce Capri's exposure to the Americas. Longer term, Fitch expects that Capri could undergo additional debt-funded acquisitions, in-line with how it has operated historically.
Parent Subsidiary Linkage: Fitch's analysis includes a strong subsidiary/weak parent approach between the parent, Capri Holdings Limited and its subsidiaries Michael Kors (USA), Inc. and Gianni Versace S.r.l. Fitch assesses the quality of the overall linkage as high, which results in an equalization of IDRs.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
Capri's 'BBB-'/RWN rating reflects its strong positioning in the U.S. handbag market and, good growth at its various brands along with its demonstrated commitment to debt reduction. The rating also considers the fashion risk inherent in the accessories and apparel space. The RWN reflects the potential for a sustained increase in leverage, pro forma for the acquisition by Tapestry, above Fitch's current expectations for EBITDAR leverage to sustain in the low-3x.
Similarly rated peers include the following: Kohl's Corp (BBB-/Negative), Macy's Inc. (BBB-/Stable), Nordstrom, Inc. (BB+/Stable), Dillard's Inc. (BBB-/Stable) and Levi Strauss & Co. (BB+/Stable).
Macy's BBB-/Stable rating reflects its position as a leading U.S. department store retailer and its ability to invest in initiatives to defend market share, including its omnichannel platform. The ratings reflect Fitch's expectation of EBITDAR leverage (adjusted debt/EBITDAR, capitalizing leases at 8x) trending in the mid-2x over time.
Kohl's 'BBB-' IDR reflects the company's reasonable position in the challenging U.S. department store space. The company benefits from its real estate positioning away from traditional regional malls, mix of national and exclusive/owned brands, and value price focus. The company's strong cash flow allows Kohl's to invest in revenue drivers such as its omnichannel model and brand partnerships, which should support market share defensibility over time. The Negative Outlook reflects Fitch's reduced confidence in Kohl's execution abilities rebound following a challenging 2022 characterized by softening spending on discretionary categories like apparel and home and management mis-execution, particularly around excess inventory and consequentially high promotional activity, pressuring margins and leverage.
Nordstrom's BB+/Stable rating reflects expectations that EBITDAR leverage (capitalizing leases at 8x) could trend around 4x in 2022/2023 before settling in the high-3x range, higher than Fitch's prior expectations of leverage sustaining below 3.5x. The ratings also reflect Nordstrom's historically good market position in the apparel, footwear, and accessories space, with its differentiated merchandise and high level of customer service, including omnichannel offering, enabling the company to enjoy strong customer loyalty. The rating also recognizes the company's exposure to stronger shopping centers and good mix of digital and off-price sales alongside its full-price department store presence.
Dillard's BBB-/Stable rating balances its regional footprint relative to nationally-positioned department stores and somewhat volatile longer-term earnings history against strong balance sheet management, resulting in good financial flexibility, modest debt position and adjusted debt/EBITDAR expected to trend below 1x.
Levi's BB+/Stable rating considers the company's good execution from a top-line and a margin standpoint, which support Fitch's longer-term expectations of low-single-digit revenue and EBITDA growth. Although operating results could experience some near-term pressure given ongoing shifts in consumer behavior, difficult comparisons and global macroeconomic uncertainty, Fitch expects that Levi will maintain EBITDAR leverage below 3.5x over time. Levi's ratings reflect its position as one of the world's largest branded apparel manufacturers, with broad channel and geographic exposure, while also considering the company's narrow focus on the Levi brand and in bottoms.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
The below Key Assumptions are for Capri on a standalone basis:
--Capri ended fiscal 2023 with revenue at USD5.6 billion, down slightly yoy. Although fiscal 2024 topline is expected to be down at Michael Kors due to a challenging macro environment, Fitch expects that continued growth at Versace and Jimmy Choo, will help support topline stability. Overall, Fitch expects that fiscal 2024 revenue could be flat to slightly down with better results in the back half of the year against easier comparisons. Beginning in fiscal 2025, Capri's topline could resume to low-single digit growth which will help support Fitch's expectations that revenue will reach USD6.0 billion by fiscal 2027.
--EBITDA moderated to USD1.2 billion in fiscal 2023 from USD1.36 billion in fiscal 2022 as topline declines and increased business investments and inflationary cost pressures offset the company's pricing initiatives and good cost control. Fitch expects that EBITDA could be flattish around USD1.2 billion in fiscal 2024 before expanding modestly beginning in fiscal 2025 in-line with topline growth. Ongoing business shifts towards Michael Kors' direct-to-consumer channel should benefit margins over time.
--FCF is expected to be around USD640 million in fiscal 2024, (assuming flat working capital) and capex around USD260 million. FCF averaged USD570 million over the past four years. FCF beginning in fiscal 2025, could trend in the USD700 million-USD770 million range assuming neutral working capital and capex of around USD250 million. Fitch expects Capri to deploy FCF towards debt reduction, in line with its financial policy.
--EBITDAR leverage has been somewhat volatile in recent years given the debt-financed purchase of Versace in fiscal 2019 and the pandemic. After declining to 2.9x in fiscal 2022 from 4.4x in fiscal 2021 based on EBITDA rebound and debt repayment, EBITDAR leverage climbed to 3.7x in fiscal 2023, driven by EBITDA declines and nearly USD700 million in incremental debt borrowings. EBITDAR leverage is expected to return back to the low-3x range over the next 12-24 months based on debt repayment and EBITDA trending around USD1.2 billion.
--Interest Rate Assumptions: Capri's unsecured notes due 2024 are fixed rate (4.25%). The revolving credit facility (SOFR+1.25%) and EUR450 million term loan (EURIBOR + 1.35%) are both floating rate instruments.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
The below sensitivities are for Capri's standalone credit profile--
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--A positive rating action could result from low single digit sales and EBITDA growth along with a change in financial policy which would increase Fitch's confidence in the company sustaining EBITDAR leverage (capitalizing rent at 8.0x) below the high-2x range.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--A negative rating action could result from EBITDA declining below USD1 billion, suggesting longer term brand challenges and which could cause adjusted EBITDAR leverage (capitalizing rent at 8.0x) to sustain above the low-3x range.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Liquidity: As of April 1, 2023, Capri had USD249 million in cash and USD874 million outstanding on its USD1.5 billion revolving credit facility. After accounting for LOC outstanding, the amount available on the revolving credit facility was USD623 million. The company's debt structure as of April 1, 2023 consisted of its USD1.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility due July 2027, and USD450 million in unsecured senior notes due September 2024. The revolving facility is co-borrowed under Capri Holdings Limited and Michael Kors (USA), Inc. and the senior notes are issued under Michael Kors (USA), Inc. The company is also party to a EUR450 million term loan facility which is borrowed under Gianni Versace S.r.l., a wholly owned subsidiary of Capri Holdings Limited. The Versace term loan matures in December 2025.
ISSUER PROFILE
Capri Holdings Limited is a leading global manufacturer and retailer of accessories and leather goods, primarily handbags, and footwear. The company's portfolio consists of three brands: Michael Kors, Jimmy Choo and Versace.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
Historical and projected EBITDA is adjusted for non-cash stock-based compensation and non-recurring charges. Fitch has adjusted the historical and projected debt by adding 8.0x annual gross rent expense.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Michael Kors (USA), Inc.
LT IDRBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
senior unsecured
LTBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
Gianni Versace S.r.l.
LT IDRBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
senior unsecured
LTBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
Capri Holdings Limited
LT IDRBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
senior unsecured
LTBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
