Fitch Affirms Czech Republic at 'AA-'; Outlook Negative

Fitch Ratings - Frankfurt am Main - 25 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed Czech Republic's Long-Term Foreign-Currency (LTFC) Issuer Default Rating (IDR) at 'AA-' with a Negative Outlook.
A full list of rating actions is detailed below.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Rating Strengths and Weaknesses: The Czech Republic's 'AA-' rating is underpinned by a record of credible macroeconomic and monetary policies, a robust institutional framework, and solid external finances. These are balanced against lower GDP per capita compared with peers' (59% of the current AA median), and a recent increase in public debt. World Bank Governance Indicators (WBGI) have improved in recent years, narrowing the gap with peers'.
Negative Outlook: The Negative Outlook reflects marked deterioration in public finances metrics, which resulted from two consecutive exogenous shocks to the Czech economy, increased government spending, and tax reductions to offset the negative effects of these shocks. Proposed consolidation measures should shrink the deficit and stabilise debt in 2024-2025; however, uncertainty regarding structural fiscal imbalances over the medium term persists.
Fiscal Deficit Widening in 2023: Budget performance so far this year has been affected by higher spending on energy compensation measures and pensions, and weaker-than-planned revenues from indirect taxes. Proceeds from windfall taxes and the dividend payment from the state-owned energy company (in total 1.3% of GDP) will support the fiscal budget in 2H23.
Pension costs remain uncertain as the adjustment of the inflation-driven indexation formula that significantly lowers the increase is being reviewed by the Constitutional Court. Should the court find the legislation unconstitutional, pension expenditures would increase this year. All in all, we see budget deficit widening to 3.8% of GDP in 2023.
New Measures to Shrink Deficit: The government has proposed a package of consolidation measures worth CZK136 billion (1.8% of forecast 2024 GDP) for 2024-2025 to address the deterioration in the fiscal position. Required legislation have not yet been approved but we expect the process to be concluded smoothly by end-2023. The largest item of the package is a cut in permanent subsidies to business, in particular to industry and agriculture. Corporate income taxation, social contributions, excise duties on tobacco and alcohol, tax on gambling and property tax will be raised. Fitch expects the budget deficit to narrow to 2.1% of GDP in 2024 and 1.8% in 2025.
Medium-term Structural Challenges: We project the budget deficit to stabilise at around 1.5% of GDP beyond 2025 and further fiscal consolidation may prove challenging for the Czech Republic, given the extent of the planned tightening and persistent structural deficits. The reform of personal income taxation (PIT) from 2020 led to a sharp drop in general government revenues from taxes on individual or household income to 3.7% of GDP in 2021 from 5.2% in 2020. According to the European Commission estimate, the PIT reform has permanently added about 1.5pp to the structural deficit. In addition, government commitment to raise military spending to 2% of GDP from 2024 and higher pension expenditures add to fiscal rigidities.
Debt Remains at Higher Level: Fitch forecasts public debt/GDP to rise to 44.7% in 2023, from 44.2% in 2022, and to remain stable until 2027. While we expect public debt to be in line with the peer median (AA median: 44.7% in 2023), it will be substantially higher than its pre-pandemic level (30% in 2019). We forecast the Czech Republic to continue to run primary deficits, compared with primary surpluses pre-pandemic. We forecast general government interest payments to increase to 2.9% of revenue in 2023 and further to 3.2% by 2025, above the current 'AA' median.
External Position to Normalise: We expect the current account to return to a small surplus of 0.2% of GDP in 2023, a significant improvement from the 6.1% deficit in 2022. The improvement will be predominantly driven by a return to a trade surplus as exports benefit from an easing of supply chains, while imports are dampened by sluggish domestic demand and lower energy needs. We expect the current account's return to pre-crisis surpluses to persist in 2024-2025 and net foreign direct investment to remain sound. The net external creditor position should remain broadly stable in 2023-2025 (at 17.8% in 2022), in line with the current 'AA' median.
Growth to Gradually Recover: We forecast the Czech economy to stagnate in 2023. While economic growth was sluggish in 1H23 (flat qoq in 1Q23 and 0.1% qoq in 2Q23), we expect a gradual recovery in 2H23, driven by a rebound of private consumption and net exports. Improving real wage growth and normalisation of savings should support household spending. We forecast GDP growth to recover to 2.2% in 2024 and 2.4% in 2025, supported by strong household consumption and investment growth. These factors will outweigh the drag from fiscal consolidation: the proposed fiscal consolidation package should shave up to 0.8pp off growth in 2024 and be broadly neutral in 2025, according to the authorities' estimates.
Inflation and Monetary Policy Easing: HICP inflation decreased to 10.2% yoy in July, from a 19.1% peak in January 2023, due to base effects, plus lower oil and food prices. In January 2024, inflation will drop sharply as the base effects unwind, utility prices fall and standard re-pricing of goods and services takes place. The proposed fiscal consolidation package should have only a small impact on inflation. We see inflation on average at 2.4%-2.5% in 2024-2025, down from 11.9% expected in 2023. The Czech National Bank held its policy rate at 7.0% since June 2022 and we believe the central bank will deliver first rate cut only in early 2024. We see the key rate at 4% by end-2024 and at 3% by end-2025.
Stable Banking Sector: The slowdown of lending activity in 1H23 was softer than expected as robust credit growth to non-financial corporates compensated weaker credit activity to households. Pressure on loan book quality has so far been contained as banks' impaired loan ratio rose only to 2% at end-2Q23 from 1.95% at end-2022.
Sector's profitability remained solid in 1H23 versus a year ago. The windfall tax on the banking sector, which will apply to the profits of the six biggest banks in 2023-2025, will have no material impact on banks' capital. We continue to view the Czech banking sector as well-capitalised (total capital ratio at 22.54% at end-2Q23) and liquid.
ESG - Governance: Czech Republic has an ESG Relevance Score (RS) of '5[+] for both Political Stability and Rights and for the Rule of Law, Institutional and Regulatory Quality and Control of Corruption. Theses scores reflect the high weight that the World Bank Governance Indicators (WBGI) have in our proprietary Sovereign Rating Model (SRM). Czech Republic has a high WBGI ranking at 81st percentile, reflecting its long record of stable and peaceful political transitions, well-established rights for participation in the political process, strong institutional capacity, effective rule of law and a low level of corruption.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
-Public Finances: Failure to put public debt on a downward trajectory through additional consolidation plans that address medium-term fiscal challenges
-Structural: A deterioration in medium-term growth prospects reflecting weakening competitiveness
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
-Public Finances: A decline in debt/GDP over the medium term, reflecting additional fiscal consolidation measures or a better-than-expected macroeconomic outlook
Macro/Structural: Greater convergence of structural indicators, including GDP per capita, towards rating peer medians.
SOVEREIGN RATING MODEL (SRM) AND QUALITATIVE OVERLAY (QO)
Fitch's proprietary SRM assigns Czech Republic a score equivalent to a rating of 'A+' on the LTFC IDR scale.
Fitch's sovereign rating committee adjusted the output from the SRM to arrive at the LTFC IDR by applying its QO, relative to SRM data and output, as follows:
Macro: +1 notch to reflect the additional macroeconomic volatility from the pandemic and energy shocks that has affected the SRM score without lasting effects on long-term macroeconomic stability, and a record of strong economic policy management in a fairly small and open economy.
Fitch's SRM is the agency's proprietary multiple regression rating model that employs 18 variables based on three-year centred averages, including one year of forecasts, to produce a score equivalent to a LTFC IDR. Fitch's QO is a forward-looking qualitative framework designed to allow for adjustment to the SRM output to assign the LTFC IDR, reflecting factors within our criteria that are not fully quantifiable and/or not fully reflected in the SRM.
COUNTRY CEILING
The Country Ceiling for Czech Republic is 'AAA', 3 notches above the LTFC IDR. This reflects very strong constraints and incentives, relative to the IDR, against capital or exchange controls being imposed that would prevent or significantly impede the private sector from converting local currency into foreign currency and transferring the proceeds to non-resident creditors to service debt payments.
Fitch's Country Ceiling Model produced a starting point uplift of +3 notches above the IDR. Fitch's rating committee did not apply a qualitative adjustment to the model result.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Czech Republic has an ESG Relevance Score of '5[+]' for Political Stability and Rights as WBGI have the highest weight in Fitch's SRM and are therefore highly relevant to the rating and a key rating driver with a high weight. As Czech Republic has a percentile rank above 50 for the governance indicator, this has a positive impact on the credit profile.
Czech Republic has an ESG Relevance Score of '5[+]' for Rule of Law, Institutional & Regulatory Quality and Control of Corruption as WBGI have the highest weight in Fitch's SRM and are therefore highly relevant to the rating and are a key rating driver with a high weight. As Czech Republic has a percentile rank above 50 for the respective governance indicators, this has a positive impact on the credit profile.
Czech Republic has an ESG Relevance Score of '4[+]'for Human Rights and Political Freedoms as the Voice and Accountability pillar of the WBGI is relevant to the rating and a rating driver. As Czech Republic has a percentile rank above 50 for the governance indicator, this has a positive impact on the credit profile.
Czech Republic has an ESG Relevance Score of '4[+]' for Creditor Rights as willingness to service and repay debt is relevant to the rating and is a rating driver for Czech Republic, as for all sovereigns. As Czech Republic has track record of 20+ years without a restructuring of public debt and captured in our SRM variable, this has a positive impact on the credit profile.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Czech Republic
LT IDRAA- Affirmed
AA- 
ST IDRF1+ Affirmed
F1+ 
LC LT IDRAA- Affirmed
AA- 
LC ST IDRF1+ Affirmed
F1+ 
Country CeilingAAA Affirmed
AAA 
senior unsecured
LTAA- Affirmed
AA- 
