Fitch Downgrades One Florida Municipal Investment Trust Fund; Removes Rating Watch Negative

Fitch Ratings - New York - 08 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has downgraded the International Fund Credit Quality Rating (FCQR) of Florida Municipal Investment Trust Intermediate High Quality Bond Fund (the fund) to 'AAf' from 'AAAf'. Fitch has also affirmed the fund's Fund Market Risk Sensitivity Rating (MRSR) at 'S3'. The FCQR has been removed from Rating Watch Negative (RWN).
The rating action is driven by Fitch's downgrade of the United States' Long-Term Foreign Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'AA+' from 'AAA' on Aug. 1, 2023. The Rating Outlook is Stable. For more information on the sovereign rating action, refer to Fitch's press release "Fitch Downgrades United States' Long-Term Ratings to 'AA+' from 'AAA'; Outlook Stable,'' dated Aug. 1, 2023.
The ratings of Florida Municipal Investment Trust 0-2 Year High Quality Bond Fund and Florida Municipal Investment Trust 1-3 Year High Quality Bond Fund remain unaffected at 'AAA'/'S1' and 'AAAf'/'S2', respectively.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
The downgrade is primarily driven by the fund's material exposure to U.S. government and agency securities, which were downgraded to 'AA+' by Fitch following a similar action on the U.S. sovereign rating on Aug. 1, 2023.
Factoring in the U.S. government downgrade, as of July 31, 2023, approximately 53% of the fund's assets under management (AUM) consisted of exposures rated in the 'AA' category, with greater than three years until maturity. The credit risk factor associated 'AA' category exposures with residual maturities greater than three years drove the fund's increase in weighted average rating factor (WARF). Previously, U.S. government and agency securities were mapped to the lower 'AAA' credit risk factor.
PORTFOLIO CREDIT QUALITY
Per Fitch's Bond Fund Rating Criteria, the fund's WARF is the primary driver of the FCQR. A fund's WARF is a function of the credit ratings of the securities held in the fund's portfolio and their remaining term to maturity, weighted by market value. The fund's WARF of 0.36 as of end-July 2023 aligns with a WARF-implied FCQR of 'AAf'.
Fitch notes that the non-U.S. government issues in the fund remain of high quality.
MARKET RISK SENSITIVITY
The fund's MRSR is primarily based on the portfolio's market risk factor (MRF). A portfolio's MRF is calculated by combining the portfolio interest rate duration and risk-adjusted spread duration of the securities in the portfolio, and adjusting for the effect of any leverage. The higher the portfolio's market risk factor then the higher the sensitivity to interest rate, spread and other market risk variables. As of end-July 2023, the Market Risk Factor of the fund's portfolio was 4.68, which aligns with a MRSR of 'S3'. The fund's 'S3' MRSR indicates moderate sensitivity to market risk.
PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION
As of end-July 2023, approximately 69% of the market value of the fund's portfolio was allocated to U.S. government and agency securities, approximately 54% of which had at least three years remaining until maturity. The remaining 31% of the fund's portfolio was allocated to asset-backed securities rated 'AAA' by Fitch or one of the other nationally recognized statistical rating organizations (30%) and cash (1%). The fund did not utilize any leverage as of the review date.
SURVEILLANCE
Fitch receives monthly fund portfolio holdings information including credit quality, market value and duration of the individual securities to conduct surveillance against the bond fund rating criteria. For additional information about Fitch's bond fund ratings criteria, please review the criteria referenced below, which can be found on Fitch's website.
INVESTMENT MANAGER
Florida Municipal Investment Trust (FMIvT) funds are managed by the Atlanta Capital Management Co. (Atlanta Capital) on behalf of the Florida League of Cities. Atlanta Capital was established in 1969 and is owned by Eaton Vance Company. Atlanta Capital's fixed income portfolio management team is comprised of three portfolio managers with a combined 75 years of investment experience. Fitch meets at least annually with the management team to perform due diligence on matters including organizational updates, operations, corporate governance and market outlook. Fitch views the team's investment advisory capabilities, resource commitment, operational controls, corporate governance, and compliance procedures as robust and consistent with the ratings assigned to the fund.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--A material increase in portfolio credit quality and/or a material decrease in portfolio duration could result in the fund's WARF falling below 0.30, which could result in the FCQR being raised to 'AAAf'. Fitch sees this as unlikely, since a change in portfolio credit quality/duration would only occur only if the investment strategy of the fund were to change, or if the U.S. was upgraded to 'AAA';
--A material and sustained decrease in portfolio duration below 4.0 years could result in the MRSR being upgraded to 'S2'. Fitch sees this as unlikely, since a change in portfolio duration would only occur only if the investment strategy of the fund were to change.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--A material decrease in portfolio credit quality and/or a material increase in portfolio duration could result in the fund's WARF to exceed 0.90, which could result in the FCQR being lowered to 'Af'. However, Fitch perceives this as unlikely in the near term absent significant credit migration, or a change in the fund's investment strategy;
--A material increase in duration beyond 7.5 years could result in the fund's MRSR being lowered to 'S4'. However, Fitch perceives this as unlikely in the near term absent significant credit migration, or a change in the fund's investment strategy.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
The sources of information used to assess this rating were the public domain and the investment manager.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Florida Municipal Investment Trust Intermediate High Quality Bond Fund
Fund Cr Qual RtgAAf Downgrade
AAAf 
SensitivityS3 Affirmed
S3 
