Fitch Downgrades One Vanguard ETF to 'AAf'/'S4'; Removes Negative Watch

Fitch Ratings - New York - 08 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has downgraded the International Fund Credit Quality Rating (FCQR) of Vanguard Mortgage-Backed Securities ETF (the fund) to 'AAf' from 'AAAf'. Fitch has also downgraded the fund's Fund Market Risk Sensitivity Rating (MRSR) to 'S4' from 'S3'. The FCQR and MRSR have been removed from Rating Watch Negative (RWN).
The rating action is driven by Fitch's downgrade of the United States' Long-Term Foreign Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'AA+' from 'AAA' on Aug. 1, 2023. The Rating Outlook is Stable. For more information on the sovereign rating action, please see "Fitch Downgrades United States' Long-Term Ratings to 'AA+' from 'AAA'; Outlook Stable'' dated Aug. 1, 2023 at www.fitchratings.com.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
The downgrade is primarily driven by the fund's 100% exposure to U.S. government and agency securities, which were downgraded to 'AA+' by Fitch following a similar action on the U.S. sovereign rating on Aug. 1, 2023. The fund tracks the performance of the Bloomberg U.S. MBS Float Adjusted Index which covers U.S. agency mortgage-backed pass through securities issued by the U.S. government and agencies. As a result, the fund's exposure profile is closely tied to the U.S. government rating.
Factoring in the U.S. government downgrade, as of June 30, 2023, approximately 93.6% of the fund's assets under management (AUM) consisted of exposures rated in the 'AA' category, with greater than three years until maturity. The credit risk factor associated 'AA' category exposures with residual maturities less than three years drove the fund's increase in weighted average rating factor (WARF). Previously, U.S. government and agency securities were mapped to the lower 'AAA' credit risk factor.
Portfolio Credit Quality
Per Fitch's Bond Fund Rating Criteria, the fund's weighted WARF is the primary driver of the FCQR. A fund's WARF is a function of the credit ratings of the securities held in the fund's portfolio and their remaining term to maturity, weighted by market value. The fund's WARF of 0.56 as of end-July 2023 aligns with a WARF-implied FCQR of 'AAf'.
MARKET RISK SENSITIVITY
The fund's MRSR is primarily based on the portfolio's market risk factor (MRF). A portfolio's MRF is calculated by combining the portfolio interest rate duration and risk-adjusted spread duration of the securities in the portfolio, and adjusting for the effect of any leverage. The higher the portfolio's market risk factor, the higher the sensitivity to interest rate, spread, and other market risk variables.
As of end-June 2023, the Market Risk Factor of the fund's portfolio was 7.48, which aligns with a MRSR of 'S3'. However, Fitch downgraded the fund's MRSR to 'S4' to reflect the sensitivity of the portfolio's MRSR to credit migration in Fitch's stress tests, as the fund's MRSF is near the upper bound (7.5) of the 'S3' MRSF range. As of the end of May 2023, the fund's MRSR was 7.52 which aligned with a MRSR of 'S4', indicating a moderate to high sensitivity to market risk.
PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION
As of end-June 2023, 100% of the market value of the fund's portfolio was allocated to U.S. government and agency securities, with approximately 0.4% of the securities maturing within one year. The fund did not utilize any leverage as of the review date.
SURVEILLANCE
Fitch receives monthly fund portfolio holdings information including credit quality, market value and duration of the individual securities to conduct surveillance against the bond fund rating criteria. For additional information about Fitch's bond fund ratings criteria, please review the criteria referenced below, available at www.fitchratings.com. WARF of 0.56 as of end-July 2023 aligns with a WARF-implied FCQR of 'AAf'.
INVESTMENT MANAGER
The Vanguard Group, Inc. (Vanguard) is an American registered investment advisor based in Malvern, Pennsylvania and is the largest provider of mutual funds and the second-largest provider of exchange-traded funds in the world. Vanguard manages about $7.7 trillion in global assets under management, as of April 2023.
Fitch views Vanguard as a competent manager given its investment advisory capabilities, track record, resources, operational controls, corporate governance and compliance procedures.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--A material increase in portfolio credit quality and/or a material decrease in portfolio duration could result in the fund's WARF falling below 0.30, which could result in the FCQR being raised to 'AAAf'. Fitch sees this as unlikely, since a change in portfolio credit quality/duration would only occur only if the investment strategy of the fund were to change, or if the U.S. was upgraded to 'AAA'.
--A material and sustained decrease in portfolio duration below 7.5 years could result in the MRSR being upgraded to 'S3'. Fitch sees this as unlikely, since a change in portfolio duration would only occur only if the investment strategy of the fund were to change.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--A material decrease in portfolio credit quality and/or a material increase in portfolio duration could result in the fund's WARF to exceed 0.90, which could result in the FCQR being lowered to 'Af'. However, Fitch perceives this as unlikely in the near-term absent significant credit migration, or a change in the fund's investment strategy.
-- A material increase in duration beyond 12.5 years could result in the fund's MRSR being lowered to 'S5'. However, Fitch perceives this as unlikely in the near-term absent significant credit migration, or a change in the fund's investment strategy.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
The sources of information used to assess this rating were the public domain and the investment manager.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Vanguard Mortgage-Backed Securities ETF
Fund Cr Qual RtgAAf Downgrade
AAAf 
SensitivityS4 Downgrade
S3 
