Moody's places Codelco's A3 ratings under review for downgrade
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today placed the A3 long-term ratings and the baa3 baseline credit assessment (BCA) of Corporacion Nacional del Cobre de Chile's (Codelco) under review for downgrade.
On Review for Downgrade:
..Issuer: Corporacion Nacional del Cobre de Chile
.... Baseline Credit Assessment, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently baa3
....Senior Unsecured Euro Medium Term Notes due 2039, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2051, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2029, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2044, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2027, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2047, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2036, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2025, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2042, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2031, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2043, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2049, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2030, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2033, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Notes due 2050, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2035, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
....Senior Unsecured Global Bonds due 2024, Placed on Review for Downgrade, currently A3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Corporacion Nacional del Cobre de Chile
....Outlook, Changed To Rating Under Review From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE / FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The review action recognizes the major operational challenges currently faced by Codelco, which, together with structural declines in ore grades, have led to significant declines in production volumes, from average levels of 1.7-1.8 million tons (including affiliates El Abra and Anglo American Sur S.A.) until 2021, to 1.55 million tons in 2022 and 1.45 million tons in the 12 months that ended in July 2023.  The decline in the company's production was mainly driven by operational difficulties due to adverse weather conditions during the first half of 2023, as well as maintenance activities, primarily in Central Southern operations. Additionally, lower ore grades at Ministro Hales and Gabriela Mistral operations, along with reduced mineral processing at the Chuquicamata open pit, significantly affected production, which was partially offset by higher mineral volumes and higher grades from the underground mine. In July 2023, Codelco lowered its production guidance to 1.31-1.35 million tons from 1.35-1.42 million tons for the full-year 2023, which is the lowest level achieved since 2009.
As volumes decline, the company needs to accelerate investments in the so-called structural projects to recover production volumes, which increases annual capital expenditure needs to around $4 billion from $3.3 billion in 2022 and levels below $3 billion in 2020-21. In about 10 years, the structural projects will account for about 65% of Codelco's total annual copper production. The higher amount of investments comes at a time of weakening cash flows because of lower volumes, higher costs and relatively lower copper prices (when compared to average prices observed in 2021-2022). Moreover, debt levels will need to increase in the short-term to face these higher CAPEX needs.
The review for downgrade reflects the likelihood that production volumes will not materially improve in the short-term and will remain below historical levels in the next 12 to 18 months, which will weigh on Codelco's profitability, leverage and coverage metrics.
The review process will focus on Codelco's initiatives towards improving production volumes (absent one-offs) and productivity, while reducing costs and expenses, and its progress towards maintaining liquidity while it continues to meet its capital spending requirements. It is unlikely that the review process will result in a downgrade of more than one notch.
Moody's could downgrade Codelco's rating or BCA if there is no visibility towards improvement in credit metrics in the next 12 to 18 months, that is, persistent low EBITDA margins and negative free cash flows lead to an overall weakening in credit metrics, with a material increase in leverage and decline in interest coverage, followed by a potential deterioration in the company's liquidity. A lowering of the BCA could lead to a downgrade of Codelco's rating, while any indication of a decline in the level of support from the Government of Chile would also exert downward rating pressure. Quantitatively, Moody's could downgrade Codelco's rating  if its leverage (Moody's-adjusted gross debt to EBITDA) stays at 2.75x or above on a sustained basis, with interest coverage (Moody's-adjusted EBIT/interest expense) declining towards 4.5x or below and Moody's-adjusted EBIT margins trending towards 15% or below for a prolonged period.
An upgrade of Codelco's ratings is unlikely in the next 12 to 18 months given the current review for downgrade. However, Moody´s could confirm the rating and change the outlook to stable if the company demonstrates its ability to turnaround operations and bring production towards historical levels and costs closer to industry standards. An upward rating movement would also be subject to the relative position of Chile's sovereign rating because of the importance of the sovereign's credit strength in terms of its ability to provide extraordinary support to the company.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE (ESG) CONSIDERATIONS
As for the environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors incorporated into Codelco's ratings, Moody's considers governance as a relevant factor, with Codelco's governance score of G-3 reflecting management credibility and track record and a somewhat aggressive financial strategy that has led to high leverage because of the need to fund the company's large capital requirements. The operational challenges and lower production volumes currently observed are incorporated in the change of management credibility and track record to 3 from 2. Moreover, as a state-owned company, all board members are nominated by the President of Chile, based on candidates selected by different groups, ensuring proper representation from workers and copper associations.
Moody's also considered exposure to environmental risks mainly related to natural capital, physical climate and water management risks, because of the significant impact on land from mining operations and the critical nature of water for Codelco's operations and water scarcity problems in Chile, reflected in the E-5 issuer profile score.
The high credit exposure to responsible production, health and safety and human capital risks, reflected in the S-4 issuer profile score, incorporates the nature of Codelco's operations, with open-pit and underground mines, and related health and safety issues. To mitigate such risks, Codelco has invested in autonomous vehicles and remote-controlled centers. Codelco's large workforce and exposure to collective bargaining agreements in Chile exacerbates the human capital risk, while responsible production risk arises from the interdependence with local communities and engagement with indigenous communities.
The ESG Credit Impact Score is CIS-3, revised from CIS-2, reflects the fact that ESG considerations have a limited impact on the current rating, with greater potential for future negative impact over time given that exposures to environmental (E-5) and social (S-4) risks carry high credit risks, which increases the potential for ESG to impact the rating in the future. The CIS-3 also incorporates Moody's view that the 100% ownership by the Chilean government and the high interdependence between Codelco and its owner help mitigate potential credit implication of ESG factors on the rating.
The methodologies used in these ratings were Mining published in October 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/76085, and Government-Related Issuers Methodology published in February 2020 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64864. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com  for a copy of these methodologies.
Headquartered in Santiago, Chile, Corporacion Nacional del Cobre de Chile (Codelco) is 100% owned by the Chilean government and is the largest producer of copper globally, with a 7% share of global mined copper production in 2022 and 28% of total production in Chile for the 12 months that ended in June 2023. The company is also one of the largest molybdenum producers globally, with a market share of around 8% in 2022. Codelco's operations include several world-class mines from a reserve, production capacity and cost perspective, as well as smelting and refining capabilities. In addition, Codelco owns 49% of the El Abra mining operations in Chile and is part of a joint venture with Mitsui & Co., Ltd. (Mitsui, A3 stable), which owns a 29.5% interest in Anglo American Sur S.A. Codelco's revenue for the 12 months that ended June 2023 was $16.6 billion.
