Moody's downgrades Lumen Technologies' CFR to Caa1; outlook negative
New York, August 22, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded Lumen Technologies, Inc.'s (Lumen) corporate family rating (CFR) to Caa1 from B2 and its probability of default rating (PDR) to Caa1-PD from B2-PD. Moody's also downgraded the following: (i) Lumen's senior secured rating to Caa2 from B3 and its senior unsecured rating to Caa3 from Caa1, (ii) Level 3 Financing, Inc.'s (Level 3) senior secured rating to B1 from Ba2 and its senior unsecured rating to B3 from B1 and (iii) Qwest Corporation's (Qwest) senior unsecured rating to B3 from B1. The company's speculative grade liquidity rating remains at SGL-3 reflecting adequate liquidity. The rating outlook remains negative.
The downgrades reflect the company's increasing financial risks and continued weak operating performance. In early 2025, Lumen will face around $1.8 billion of debt maturities and in 2027, the company will have an additional $9.4 billion of maturing debt. In addition, Lumen faces execution risks with continued operating and margin pressures, high capital intensity and negative free cash flow associated with the fiber buildout of its consumer footprint and renewed efforts to revitalize its enterprise business. Together these risks raise the possibility of distressed debt exchanges, especially given Lumen's weak equity valuation and low debt trading levels.  Pro forma for the sale of its EMEA asset, Moody's projects total debt-to-EBITDA to be 4.2x by year end 2023 and 4.4x in 2024. Moody's also notes the recent news of Lumen's potential liabilities resulting from lead sheathed cables and that a significant percentage of its lenders hired financial and legal advisors.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Lumen Technologies, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Caa1 from B2
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to Caa1-PD from B2-PD
....Backed Senior Secured Bank Credit Facility, Downgraded to Caa2 from B3
....Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to Caa2 from B3
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to Caa3 from Caa1
..Issuer: Level 3 Financing, Inc.
....Senior Secured Bank Credit Facility, Downgraded to B1 from Ba2
....Backed Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to B1 from Ba2
....Backed Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to B3 from B1
..Issuer: Qwest Corporation
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to B3 from B1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Lumen Technologies, Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Negative
..Issuer: Level 3 Financing, Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Negative
..Issuer: Qwest Corporation
....Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Lumen's Caa1 CFR reflects the company's elevated leverage, weak operating performance, execution risks and limited pricing power in a highly competitive marketplace. With limited visibility to improving operating and financial trends and high capital intensity to support retail subscriber growth and to upsell services to enterprise customers, Moody's expects Lumen to generate negative free cash flow of $1.1 billion in 2023 (which includes a $1.038 billion one time cash tax payments related to asset sales) and around $250 million in 2024. In addition, Moody's projects leverage to be at 4.2x in 2023 and 4.4x in 2024. Moody's believes that Lumen has a short execution runway to demonstrate its ability to slow the pace of negative operating trends and prove the long-term sustainability of its consumer and enterprise business model.
At the same time the ratings take into consideration the possibility that the company can shore up its capital structure by divesting of certain assets, raising private capital and / or successfully refinancing some or all of its capital structure. Lumen has attractive assets for which a sale could generate significant amount of net cash proceeds to either reduce debt or re-invest in the business.
The SGL-3 speculative grade liquidity rating reflects Moody's expects that Lumen will have adequate liquidity over the next 12 months, supported by $411 million in cash as of June 30, 2023, $2 billion in availability under the company's $2.2 billion senior secured revolving credit facility expiring in January 2025, and Moody's expectation of around $1.1 billion of negative free cash flow for full year 2023. With respect to the term loan A and term loan A-1 facilities ($1.3 billion outstanding as of December 31, 2022) and the revolver, the credit agreement requires Lumen to maintain a total leverage ratio of not more than 4.75x and a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio of at least 2.0x. The term loan B facility is not subject to the leverage or interest coverage maintenance covenants. Moody's estimates Lumen will remain in compliance with the total leverage ratio and interest coverage ratio for the next 12 months, although the ratio could tighten in the future which could limit effective availability.
The instrument ratings reflect both the probability of default of Lumen, as reflected in the Caa1-PD PDR, an average expected family recovery rate of 50% at default and the loss given default assessment of the debt instruments in the capital structure based on a priority of claims.
Lumen's corporate structure includes two layers of debt (secured/unsecured) at the holding company (Lumen Technologies, Inc.) level and two main operating company credit pools (Qwest Corporation and Level 3 Parent, LLC) with multiple classes of debt within each.
At the Lumen Technologies, Inc. holding company level, Moody's rates the company's senior secured credit facilities Caa2; these senior secured credit facilities include a revolver, term loan A, term loan A-1 and term loan B. Senior secured notes at this holding company level are also rated Caa2. The Caa2 rating reflects the senior position of these senior secured instruments ahead of Lumen's Caa3 rated unsecured debt. The senior secured credit facilities are guaranteed on a secured basis by Qwest Communications International, Inc., Qwest Services Corp., CenturyTel Holdings, Inc., and CenturyLink Communications, LLC. Qwest Capital Funding, Inc. is an unsecured debt guarantor. Moody's treats these credit facilities as subordinated to the debt of Qwest and Level 3 given the lack of operating subsidiary guarantees. The Caa3 senior unsecured rating reflects its junior position in the capital structure at the holding company level and the significant amount of senior debt, including as of June 30, 2023: $8.7 billion of debt at Lumen, $8.7 billion of debt at Level 3, $2.2 billion of debt at Qwest and $0.2 billion of (unrated) debt at Qwest Capital Funding, Inc.
The senior unsecured debt of Qwest is rated B3 based on its structural seniority and the low leverage tolerance of Qwest's business and credit profile (Moody's adjusted debt leverage was 0.7x as of June 30, 2023 -- a financial maintenance covenant allows for 2.85x debt leverage at the entity). The senior unsecured notes of Level 3 are rated B3, reflecting their structural seniority to Level 3 Parent, LLC and junior position relative to Level 3's senior secured bank credit facility and senior secured notes which are rated B1. Leverage within the Level 3 Parent LLC credit pool was 3.8x (Moody's adjusted) as of June 30, 2023 -- a debt incurrence test allows for 5.75x debt leverage at the Level 3 entity.
Lumen's CIS-5 Credit Impact Score indicates the rating is lower than it would have been if ESG risk exposures did not exist and the negative impact is more pronounced than issuers scored CIS-4. The score reflects the company's increasingly aggressive financial policy, elevated leverage, and limited financial flexibility as well as changing demographic and societal trends towards the use of wireline connectivity.
The negative outlook reflects (i) Lumen's declining revenue and EBITDA trends with limited visibility as to when the corporate turnaround will yield meaningful financial / operating results and (ii) the company's limited financial flexibility with around $1.8 billion in debt maturing beginning in 2025 and an additional $9.4 billion in 2027.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The rating could be upgraded if Lumen achieves a long-term solution to its debt refinancing needs, the company's operating performance and liquidity improves, and free cash flow turns positive. The ratings could be downgraded if the company's liquidity position and operating performance or ability to service its debt deteriorates or Moody's view on the likelihood of a default or recovery for debtholders were to be lowered.
Headquartered in Monroe, Louisiana, Lumen Technologies, Inc., is an integrated communications company that provides an array of communications services to large enterprise, mid-market enterprise, government and wholesale customers in its larger Business segment. The company's smaller Mass Markets segment primarily provides broadband services to its residential and small business customer base.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Telecommunications Service Providers published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393391. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
