Moody's affirms MC Brazil's Ba3 Senior Secured Global Notes; outlook changed to negative
New York, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today affirmed the Ba3 rating assigned to MC Brazil Downstream Trading S.A.R.L. (MC Brazil)'s Senior Secured Global Notes. The outlook was changed to negative from stable.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: MC Brazil Downstream Trading S.A.R.L.
.... Senior Secured Global Notes, Affirmed Ba3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: MC Brazil Downstream Trading S.A.R.L.
.... Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The change of outlook to negative reflects Moody's perception of increased risks to the  company's cash generation driven by the higher government interference in the oil and gas sector through the state owned company Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. - PETROBRAS (Ba1 stable), coupled with higher operating expenses than initially planned and more volatility in refined product crack spreads. Moody's revised rating scenario for Acelen encompasses a legal Debt Service Coverage Ratio (DSCR) below the initial expectations in both 2024 and 2025, at 1.6x and 1.9x respectively, with an average of 2.6x during the life of the transaction, which entails a lower buffer from internal cash generation to sustain a prolonged period of lower margins or unexpected cash needs.
The affirmation of MC Brazil's Ba3 senior secured global notes rating reflects the Mataripe refinery's (RefMat) strong asset features and competitive position following the completion of major investments for the ramp-up of its operations; as well as its strategic location that allowed it to practice international parity prices (IPP), providing some shield against Petroleo Brasileiro S.A. - PETROBRAS' pricing policy. It also considers the sponsor profile, with a long track record investing in the refining and petrochemical business, and Acelen's new management team with solid industry expertise to execute on the company's growth strategy.
The rating remains limited by RefMat's significant exposure to merchant risk and low visibility into the future offtake profile and fuel prices, leading to reduced predictability of future cash flows. It is also limited by the execution risk related to its capex plan and the achievement of targeted efficiency savings. The financing structure lacks of Operating and Maintenance (O&M) reserves to support more frequent maintenances than anticipated.
Acelen's management team took control of the assets in early 2022 and executed an accelerated investment strategy for the business ramp-up that completed in January 2023, nine months earlier than Moody's anticipated. As a result, the company was able to operate the refinery for the entire year in 2022 benefitting from higher crack spreads that supported a $61 million cash sweep payment in January 2023. Utilization rates reached 82.7% in March 2023, close to 83.4% of Moody's initial rating's case.
Despite the positive start, the refinery suffered some cash flow pressures in the third quarter of 2022 that will likely persist until June 2023. Amongst the challenges are: (i) higher than anticipated capex and opex, which includes non recurring cost of implementation (operating costs neighboring $10 per barrel (bbl) against $6/bbl initially expected) with more frequent asset maintenances; (ii) higher than anticipated crude supply prices, as the Brazilian tax regulation favors crude oil exports over domestic use; (iii) a federal tax holiday on gasoline and diesel that pressured working capital generation, as the federal government implemented a temporary tax exemption on certain refined products to control inflation during election campaigns, while taxes continued to be paid on crude oil purchases; and (iv) depressed crack margins on very low sulfur oils (VLSFO) that bottomed at $-10.4/bbl along with higher international freights costs following geopolitical disruptions in international markets. These issues have driven Acelen to report negative EBITDA margins in both the fourth quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 2023. Nonetheless, we expect a gradual improvement in cash generation through the second half of the year, supported by the recovery of approximately $297 million on the monetization of accumulated tax credits with the gradual relief of the temporary exemption.
Moody's Base Case Scenario assumes a continued expansion in utilization rates allowing for higher cost efficiency savings over time. It considers an average adjusted crack margin of $13.8/bbl and an average utilization rate of 91.7% over the nameplate capacity, along with crude prices at $75/bbl, at the top of Moody's medium-term oil price range. Under these assumptions, Moody's expects EBITDA to expand from $81 million in 2023 to $779 million in 2027, resulting in DSCRs ranging between 1.6x and 3.4x during the life of the transaction. Cash flow from operations (CFO) to Debt ratio ranges from 12.2% to 19.9% over the next three years. The leverage profile and liquidity position still provides some cushion to withstand debt service under different scenarios of stress on the main assumptions. Moody's estimates that the adjusted crack margin could fall as low as $11.47 to result in a minimum DSCR of 1.0x in 2025.
Acelen's liquidity position provides some leeway for the company to continue the ramp-up of its operations and withstand near term volatility although at a lower buffer than initially anticipated. As of March 2023, the company counted on bank guarantees for the purchase of crude oil; and it reported a cash position of $440 million, including a pre-funded, 6-month reserve account for debt service that further supports the debt services for 2023 and 2024, ranging between $141 and $171 million.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
A ratings upgrade is unlikely to happen at this point given the negative outlook. The outlook could return to stable if current credit risks settle, such as fuel prices have generally closely replicated those of import parity. Quantitatively, the outlook could return to stable if expected cash flow increase and translate into sustainable DSCR ratios above 2.5x.
Conversely, ratings could be downgraded upon exacerbation of current credit risks, leading to a frustration in cash generation such that DSCR and the Project CFO to Debt remains, respectively below 2.5x and 15% on a sustainable basis.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
MC Brazil Downstream Trading S.A.R.L.'s CIS-3 indicates that ESG considerations have a limited impact on the current credit rating with potential for greater negative impact over time. The issuer is exposed to environmental and social risks stemming from its oil refinery operations.
The oil refining sector is increasingly being exposed to environmental regulations for the transition to low-carbon energy, which will lead to an eventual decline in demand for petroleum products in the coming decades and incremental investment requirements. Nonetheless, we view the impact of carbon transition risk is increasing just gradually during the life of the transaction. We also expect the project company to hire and maintain broad insurance policies to cover for sudden pollution and environmental claims.
The exposure to social risks relates to safety controls and socially driven policy agendas related to the control of fuel prices, with evidence of regional political interference in recent years.
MC Brazil's comprehensive package of project finance credit enhancements mitigates governance risks. Nonetheless, governance risks arise from refinancing risks and liquidity arrangements that compare unfavorable with other project finance transactions.
ISSUER PROFILE
The issuer, MC Brazil Downstream Trading S.A.R.L. (MC Brazil) is a private limited liability company established under the laws of Luxembourg, as part of the acquisition financing of the Mataripe Refinary ("RefMat") by Acelen (formerly known as MC Brazil Downstream Participações S.A.), an acquisition vehicle indirectly owned, controlled and advised by Mubadala Capital. Incorporated in Brazil, Acelen directly owns and controls the RefMat refinery complex, including the logistics assets, and the project MC Brazil. As such, the credit analysis is based on the consolidated credit profile of Acelen.
RefMat is a refinery cluster built in 1950, with current operating processing capacity of 302,000 barrels per day (bpd) of crude and storage capacity of 3.7 million for crude and 6.2 million for refined products. The Project Company also encompasses a logistic infrastructure including 679 kilometers of oil pipelines and the TEMADRE marine terminal. With total assets of $3.8 billion and annual revenue of $10.9 billion as of March 2023, Acelen is the primary supplier of oil-refined products in the northeast and north regions in Brazil.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Generic Project Finance Methodology published in January 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/361401. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
