Moody's revises outlooks on SK Innovation and SK Geo Centric to stable from negative; affirms Baa3 ratings
Hong Kong, August 16, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has revised to stable from negative the outlooks on SK Innovation Co. Ltd. (SKI) and SK Geo Centric Co., Ltd. (SKGC).
At the same time, Moody's has affirmed the Baa3 issuer ratings of SKI and SKGC.
Moody's has also affirmed the Baa3 backed senior unsecured rating of SK Battery America, Inc., reflecting the unconditional and irrevocable guarantee from the company's ultimate parent, SKI. The agency has also revised SK Battery America's outlook to stable from negative.
"The change in SKI's outlook to stable from negative reflects our expectation that the company's financial leverage will improve gradually over the next 12-18 months, as earnings growth in its battery business will likely more than offset net debt growth," says Wan Hee Yoo, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Credit Officer.
"The rating action on SKGC mirrors that on SKI, given SKGC's full ownership by SKI and the close operational relationship between the two companies," adds Yoo.
RATINGS RATIONALE
SK Innovation Co. Ltd.
Moody's expects SKI's adjusted EBITDA to decline to about KRW4.0 trillion in 2023 from a very strong level of KRW5.0 trillion in 2022, mainly because inventory-related losses incurred in the first half (H1) of 2023 and weaker margins from the refining business are likely to more than offset earnings recovery in the battery business. However, the agency expects SKI's adjusted EBITDA to increase to about KRW5.7 trillion in 2024, mainly supported by further earnings growth in its battery business.
After sizable losses in SKI's battery business for H1 2023, Moody's expects profitability in this business to improve over the next 12-18 months, supported by improving operating efficiencies and large tax credits (the Advanced Manufacturing Production Credit under the Inflation Reduction Act which Moody's assumes to total about KRW1.3 trillion over 2023-24).
At the same time, despite SKI's large scale non-debt funding measures executed and announced in 2023, Moody's expects the company's large capital spending over 2023-24 to substantially increase its adjusted net debt. Specifically, Moody's expects the company's adjusted net debt to increase to about KRW25.2 trillion by the end of 2024 from KRW16.8 trillion as of the end of 2022 absent further deleveraging measures.  
Based on these assumptions, Moody's expects SKI's adjusted net debt/EBITDA to weaken to about 5.0x in 2023 from 3.4x in 2022, but improve to about 4.5x in 2024. These ratios are largely consistent with its underlying credit strength.
However, execution risks in SKI's battery business present downside risks to the financial leverage forecast. Nevertheless, Moody's expects SKI to take measures to prevent an increase in its financial leverage.
SKI's Baa3 rating reflects its underlying credit strength and a two-notch uplift based on Moody's expectation that the company will receive institutional support from the Korean government (Aa2 stable) and parental support from SK Inc., in times of need.
SKI's underlying credit strength is underpinned by the company's leading position as Korea's largest refining company and its diversified operations. These strengths are counterbalanced by SKI's exposure to the inherently cyclical refining and petrochemical market conditions, its moderate capital structure and the execution risks associated with its battery business.
SK Geo Centric Co., Ltd.
SKGC's earnings should increase gradually over 2023-24 from very weak levels in 2022, but will still remain below mid-cycle levels during this period, given challenging industry conditions particularly in its olefin business. Moody's also assumes that the company will not pay dividends to its parent during this period considering its increased investment needs.
Based on these assumptions and SKGC's largely steady debt, Moody's expects the company's adjusted debt/EBITDA to improve to about 5.4x in 2023 and 4.8x in 2024 from 9.5x in 2022. These ratios are largely consistent with SKGC's underlying credit strength.
SKGC's Baa3 rating continues to incorporate a two-notch uplift from the company's underlying credit strength, because of a high likelihood of strong parental support from SKI.
SKGC's underlying credit strength is underpinned by the company's stable domestic market position and vertically integrated operations with SKI. These strengths are counterbalanced by the company's exposure to volatile market conditions given its commodity petrochemical-centered product mix, and its high financial leverage.
In terms of environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors, SKI and SKGC are exposed to increasing environmental regulations and safety risks, especially in their refining and petrochemical businesses. These risks are tempered by the companies' good track record of environmental compliance and solid operational capabilities. SKI also has high exposure to carbon transition risk arising from a potential decline in demand for petroleum products. This risk can be alleviated if SKI successfully increases its revenue and improves profitability in its fast-growing electric vehicle battery business. The ratings also consider SKI's aggressive financial strategy, as reflected by its large debt-funded investments in the battery business.  
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Moody's could upgrade SKI's rating if the company significantly increases its earnings while containing net debt growth, such that retained cash flow (RCF)/adjusted net debt exceeds 15%-20% and adjusted net debt/EBITDA stays below 3.0x on a sustained basis.
Moody's could downgrade SKI's rating if the company fails to improve profitability in its battery business, or if it undertakes more aggressive debt-funded investments, such that its RCF/adjusted net debt stays below 8%-10% or its adjusted net debt/EBITDA exceeds 4.5x-5.0x on a sustained basis.
Moody's could upgrade SKGC's rating if SKI's rating is upgraded and SKGC maintains its current close relationship with SKI with adjusted debt/EBITDA remaining below 5.0x-6.0x on a sustained basis.
Conversely, a downgrade of SKI's rating will result in a downgrade of SKGC's rating. Moody's will also review SKGC's rating in the event of significant adverse changes in its relationship with SKI. The agency could also downgrade SKGC's rating if the company's adjusted debt/EBITDA remains above 6.0x-7.0x on a sustained basis amid structural weakness in the industry or an increase in debt.
The principal methodology used in rating SK Innovation Co. Ltd. and SK Battery America, Inc. was Refining and Marketing published in August 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74331. The principal methodology used in rating SK Geo Centric Co., Ltd. was Chemicals published in June 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/389870. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
SK Innovation Co. Ltd. is Korea's largest refining and marketing company by refining capacity. The company's operations are diversified across its refining and marketing, petrochemical, exploration and production, lubricants and battery-related businesses.
SK Geo Centric Co., Ltd. is a leading petrochemical company in Korea, with 7.4 million tons of annual petrochemical production capacity as of 30 June 2023. The company is wholly owned by SK Innovation Co. Ltd.                
