Moody's downgrades one interest-only class of WFRBS 2011-C5
Approximately $15 million of notional balance structured securities affected
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service, ("Moody's") has downgraded the rating on one interest-only (IO) class in WFRBS Commercial Mortgage Trust 2011-C5, Commercial Mortgage-Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2011-C5 as follows:
Cl. X-B*, Downgraded to Caa3 (sf); previously on Apr 5, 2022 Downgraded to Caa1 (sf)
* Reflects Interest Only Classes
RATINGS RATIONALE
The rating on the (IO) class, Cl. X-B, was downgraded due to the decline in the credit quality of its reference classes resulting from principal paydowns of higher quality reference classes. The deal has paid down 83% since Moody's last review and nearly 99% since securitization. As of the August 2023 remittance report, all the originally referenced classes for the IO class, except Class H (which is not rated by Moody's), has now paid down in full and Class H has already realized a 9.1% loss on its original balance.
Moody's rating action reflects a base expected loss of 27.3% of the current pooled balance, compared to 15.6% at Moody's last review. Moody's base expected loss plus realized losses is now 0.7% of the original pooled balance, compared to 1.5% at the last review. Moody's provides a current list of base expected losses for conduit and fusion CMBS transactions on moodys.com at http://www.moodys.com/viewresearchdoc.aspx?docid=PBS_SF215255.
FACTORS THAT WOULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING:
An IO class may be subject to ratings upgrades if there is an improvement in the credit quality of its referenced classes, subject to the limits and provisions of the updated IO methodology.
An IO class may be subject to ratings downgrades if there is (i) a decline in the credit quality of the reference classes and/or (ii) paydowns of higher quality reference classes, subject to the limits and provisions of the updated IO methodology.
METHODOLOGY UNDERLYING THE RATING ACTION
The methodologies used in this rating were "Large Loan and Single Asset/Single Borrower Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securitizations Methodology" published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/391055 and "Moody's Approach to Rating Structured Finance Interest-Only (IO) Securities" published in February 2019 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/59126. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
Moody's analysis incorporated a loss and recovery approach in rating the P&I classes in this deal since 100% of the pool is in special servicing. In this approach, Moody's determines a probability of default for particular specially serviced loans that it expects will generate a loss and estimates a loss given default based on a review of broker's opinions of value (if available), other information from the special servicer, available market data and Moody's internal data. The loss given default for each loan also takes into consideration repayment of servicer advances to date, estimated future advances and closing costs. Translating the probability of default and loss given default into an expected loss estimate, Moody's then applies the aggregate loss from specially serviced to the most junior classes and the recovery as a pay down of principal to the most senior classes.
DEAL PERFORMANCE
As of the August 17, 2023 distribution date, the transaction's aggregate certificate balance has decreased by 98.6% to $15.4 million from $1.1 billion at securitization. The certificates are collateralized by two remaining mortgage loans, which are both delinquent and in special servicing. The transaction has already experienced an aggregate $3.4 million loss based on previously liquidated loans.
The largest specially serviced loan is the SpringHill Suites Wheeling Loan ($8.6 million – 55.4% of the pool), which is secured by a 115-room Marriott-flagged hotel located in Wheeling, West Virginia. The loan was transferred to special servicing for imminent monetary default in September 2021 and failed to payoff at its loan maturity date in September 2022.  The property was significant impacted from the business disruptions caused by the coronavirus pandemic and the property's NOI has declined year over year since 2020 causing the loan DSCR to remain 1.00X since 2020. An updated appraisal value from January 2023 valued the property 37% below the value at securitization. The loan is last paid through its September 2021 payment date and servicer commentary indicated a receiver was appointed in October 2022, and they are continuing to evaluate workout options with the borrower.
The other specially serviced loan is the Poughkeepsie Galleria II loan ($6.9 million – 44.6% of the pool), which is secured by an 82,000 SF retail space attached to the Poughkeepsie Galleria, the 1.2 million SF super-regional mall located in Poughkeepsie, New York. The collateral is 100% occupied by three tenants, Best Buy, Old Navy, and H&M. Best Buy, which rents 62% of the net rentable area (NRA), exercised their option to extend their lease term by five years through January 2026. The loan has been in special servicing since April 2020 and as of the August 2023 remittance statement was last paid thru its June 2023 payment date. Servicer commentary indicated the borrower and lender executed a loan modification to provide (among other terms) an extension of the maturity date to January 2025 with two additional extensions one-year extensions options and the loan is expected to remain in special servicing for a rehab period.
