Moody's downgrades Mavenir's CFR to Caa1; outlook stable
New York, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded Mavenir Systems, Inc.'s (Mavenir or the Company) Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to Caa1 from B3, Probability of Default Rating (PDR) to Caa1-PD from B3-PD and senior secured first lien bank credit facility to Caa1 from B3. The outlook is stable.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Mavenir Systems, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Caa1 from B3
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to Caa1-PD from B3-PD
....Backed Senior Secured First Lien Bank Credit Facility, Downgraded to Caa1 from B3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Mavenir Systems, Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Stable
The downgrade of the CFR to Caa1 reflects significantly lower revenue and EBITDA expectations over the next 12-18 months, due primarily to economic uncertainties, slower than expected radio deployments, and a significant delay by a major customer to deploy Mavenir's solution in a fixed wireless architecture. Weak liquidity was also a driver, with very limited cash, revolver capacity or alternate forms of committed capital. Based on management's current forecast, EBITDA will rise despite revenues declining by near mid-single digit percent, lifted primarily by significant cost savings targeted near $110 million over the next year. There is, however, uncertainty given very high governance risk with private equity sponsors pursuing an aggressive growth strategy with very high research and development costs (over 50% of revenue) driving significantly negative free cash flows. Actual results could, and have, differed materially from plan.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Mavenir's credit profile is constrained by governance risk (G-5 Issuer Profile Score) driven by highly concentrated ownership with private equity sponsors that are pursuing a very aggressive, venture-capital-like growth strategy in parallel with a core business which produce nearly 80% of consolidated revenue. This risk is reflected in Mavenir's CIS-5 Credit Impact Score which indicates that the rating is lower than it would have been if ESG risk exposures did not exist, and the negative impact is more pronounced than for issuers scored CIS-4. The company spends substantial funds on research and development for  new business opportunities, producing very low profitability, negative free cash flows and very high leverage. This business model requires the sponsors to regularly pre-fund the business with equity capital (and some dependence on debt capital markets) to maintain liquidity. The Company is also relatively small in scale with revenues expected to fall nearly 20% over the last 2 years (FY 2021 actual through management's FY 2023 plan). High customer concentration (near 20% for the top customer), limited segmental diversity, and a very tiny share of a very large market with much larger competitors are also constraints.
Strengths to the credit profile include a large target addressable market with strong demand drivers. Its niche position to develop and deploy new software, hardware, and services for next generation 5G OpenRAN wireless architectures is generating a small, but high-growth base of new revenue streams. It also has hundreds of customers including most of the top 20 carriers and good geographic revenue diversity which are positive credit factors.
Moody's expects Mavenir's liquidity to be weak over the next 12 months. Mandatory payments will be in excess of internal sources (including cash plus cash EBITDA). There is limited availability on the revolving credit facility (no more than approximately $26 million) given the 5.6x consolidated net leverage covenant that springs when the RCF is more than 35% drawn, which would breach the test. Moody's expects the company to draw the maximum available capacity over the next 12 months, at the sponsors direction. Alternate liquidity is very limited with an all-bank capital structure and asset-lite business model.
Moody's rates the Senior Secured Credit Facilities Caa1, in line with the CFR reflecting a Caa1-PD Probability of Default Rating and Moody's expectation for an average recovery of approximately 50% in a default scenario.
The stable outlook reflects Moody's expectation for the business to continue generating very negative EBITDA and free cash flows, driven by declines in core revenue and very high R&D spending. Moody's expect financial sponsors will remain committed to equity funding most all cash needs of the business to support its growth initiatives until the company turns cash flow positive.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Moody's could consider a positive rating action if free cash flows turn positive on a sustained basis and financial policy turns less aggressive, significantly moderating R&D spend as a percentage of revenues helping to deleverage the business. An upgrade could also be conditional on sustained revenue and EBITDA growth and better liquidity.
Moody's could consider a negative rating action if financial sponsors provide less support (e.g. cash equity) requiring a growing and higher periodic mix of incremental debt to fund the business, weakening liquidity further. A downgrade could also be considered if revenue and EBITDA continue to decline, or R&D spending does not significantly moderate relative to the scale of the business or cash equity contributions.
Mavenir Systems, Inc. sells core network infrastructure software solutions for 4G/5G, to mobile network operators. The Company is a combination of the former mobile division of Mitel Networks Corporation and Xura, Inc., excluding Xura's enterprise messaging business. Mavenir is majority owned and controlled by the private equity firm, Siris Capital. Koch Strategic Platforms ("KSP"), a subsidiary of Koch Investments Group, owns a minority interest. The Company generated approximately $473 million in revenue during the last 12 months ended April 30, 2023.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Business and Consumer Services published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356424. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
