Moody's affirms Milwaukee, WI's A3 issuer and GO ratings, downgrades sewer revenue rating to A3; outlooks stable
New York, August 22, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed the City of Milwaukee, WI's A3 issuer and general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) ratings. Concurrently, Moody's has downgraded to A3 from A2 the city's sewer revenue rating. The outlook on all debt has been revised to stable from negative.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A3 issuer rating reflects the city's improved financial position and recent authorization to implement a sales tax, which will help to counteract rising unfunded pension liabilities and fixed costs. Significant pension plan modifications and an increase in state shared revenue will support the maintenance of satisfactory reserves. The rating also acknowledges the city's large and diverse tax base which serves as an economic hub for southeast Wisconsin (Aa1 stable),  though the regional economic metrics trail the nation.
The A3 GOULT rating is the same as the issuer rating. The GOULT bonds are backed by the city's full faith and credit pledge, and are paid from a dedicated property tax that is not limited by rate or amount.
The downgrade to A3 on the sewer revenue bonds reflects the system's narrow liquidity, drop in coverage following the reclassification of certain expenses, and the strong governance connection between the city and sewer system as a business-type activity of the city, including a history of comingling cash. The rating also considers strong legal covenants, including a cash funded debt service reserve funded at maximum annual debt service (MADS).
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook on the issuer and GOULT ratings reflects our expectation that leverage and fixed costs will moderate, but remain elevated over the near-term, supported by a newly approved sales tax and modifications to the city's pension plan.
The stable outlook on the sewer system revenue debt mirrors the stable outlook assigned to the city given its close governance ties and coterminous service area.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Continued strengthening of financial position
- Moderation of total leverage and fixed costs
- Material and sustained increases in liquidity (sewer enterprise)
- Upgrade of the city's issuer rating (sewer enterprise)
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Narrowing of operating reserves
- Materially increased leverage or fixed costs
- Material growth in leverage or declines in debt service coverage or liquidity (sewer enterprise)
- Downgrade of the city's issuer rating (sewer enterprise)
LEGAL SECURITY
Outstanding GOULT debt is backed by the city's full faith and credit pledge. Debt service is payable from a designated property tax levy that is unlimited as to rate or amount.
Debt service on the sewerage system revenue bonds is payable from net revenue of the sewer utility. The bonds also benefit from a "service to the city" provision, in which the city pledges to pay the sewerage system an annual fee that would ensure 1.0x MADS coverage in any given year, subject to annual appropriation.
PROFILE
Milwaukee is the largest city in Wisconsin. It provides comprehensive municipal services, including health and human services, recreation, transportation and public safety, to approximately 578,000 residents.
The Milwaukee sewer system is an enterprise of the City of Milwaukee. It is responsible for wastewater and stormwater collection within a service area that is coterminous with the city.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the issuer and general obligation ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. The principal methodology used in the revenue ratings was US Municipal Utility Revenue Debt Methodology published in April 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386721. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
