Moody's assigns B3 rating to Mongolian Mining's proposed USD notes; rating is under review for downgrade
Hong Kong, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a B3 senior unsecured rating to the proposed senior notes to be issued by Mongolian Mining Corporation (MMC) (B3 ratings under review) and its subsidiary, Energy Resources LLC, and guaranteed by other key subsidiaries. The B3 rating on the proposed senior notes is under review for downgrade.
MMC will use the net proceeds from the proposed issuance to refinance its US$350 million existing notes maturing in April 2024.
RATINGS RATIONALE
"The review for downgrade of MMC's B3 rating reflects its tight liquidity and the uncertainty over the proposed note issuance. That said, we could confirm the rating if the proposed note issuance is completed on satisfactory terms and conditions so that MMC's liquidity profile significantly improves, alleviating the refinancing risk on its maturing debt in April 2024," says Shawn Xiong, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Analyst.
The proposed senior notes are rated at the same level as the company's corporate family rating (CFR) since the notes will rank pari passu with all other senior unsecured obligations of MMC and its subsidiary, Energy Resources LLC. In addition, the notes will be guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by MMC's other key subsidiaries, which eliminates structural subordination risk.
MMC's B3 CFR, which is under review for downgrade, is underpinned by the company's integrated coking coal operations with long reserves, competitive cost position, and improving operations and debt leverage. These strengths are counterbalanced by its small scale with high concentration, emerging market risks and exposure to carbon transition risks.
MMC delivered a solid performance in the first half of 2023, with the sales volume of coal reaching 4.9 million tonnes, a year-over-year growth of 419%. Moody's expects the company to continue its steady production and sales growth. The recent weakening in met coal prices will likely slow down MMC's previously strong earnings momentum and free cash flow generation during the second half of the year.
MMC's liquidity is weak with a limited buffer, excluding the proposed note issuance. As of the end of June 2023, its total cash holding of US$208 million and Moody's projected cash flows from operations are likely insufficient to cover its US$350 million notes due in April 2024 and projected basic and growth capital spending during this period.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
In its review, the agency will focus on the progress and completion of MMC's refinancing plan for its $350 million notes due 2024, and the company's business plan for its mining operations amid ongoing industry volatility.
An upgrade of MMC's rating is unlikely given the rating is on review for downgrade. But we could confirm the rating if the proposed note issuance is completed on satisfactory terms and conditions and MMC's liquidity profile significantly improves.
Conversely, Moody's could downgrade MMC's rating if the company fails to complete the refinancing plan on time.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Mining published in October 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/76085. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
With its operations having commenced in 2009, Mongolian Mining Corporation is the largest producer and exporter of high-quality washed hard coking coal in Mongolia (B3 stable). It has fully integrated coking coal operations, comprising mining, processing, transportation, and sales and marketing of coking coal and other coal products. In the first half of 2023, the company's total run-of-mine coal production was 8.0 million tonnes.
Listed on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong (HKEX) in 2010, MMC owns and operates two open-pit coking coal mines in the Gobi Desert – the main Ukhaa Khudag mine and the Baruun Naran mine. All of the company's coal operations are located in Mongolia, while most of its coal products are sold to industrial end-users in China.
The local market analyst for this rating is Jin Wu, +86 (21) 2057-4021.
