Moody's downgrades VNET's CFR to Caa1; outlook remains negative
Hong Kong, September 01, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has today downgraded the corporate family rating (CFR) of VNET Group, Inc. (VNET) to Caa1 from B3.
The outlook remains negative.
"The rating downgrade and negative outlook reflect VNET's heightened refinancing risk as the maturity of its $600 million convertible bonds nears its puttable date in February 2024," says Shawn Xiong, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Analyst.
"The rating action also considers the company's delays in executing its refinancing plans amid a tight funding environment, which has led to its weak liquidity to address its convertible bonds repayment and other cash needs over the next 12-18 months. These risks offset the positive impact from its steady internet data center operations in China," adds Xiong.
RATINGS RATIONALE
VNET's Caa1 CFR reflects the company's weak liquidity, high debt leverage and persistent negative free cash flow due to its high investment needs to expand capacity. It also reflects Moody's concern over the company's ability to execute its financial management plan satisfactorily and well ahead of its major debt maturity.
These constraints offset the company's solid position in China's internet data center (IDC) market, its strategically located data centers, operating track record featuring steady revenue growth, diversified customer base and established partnerships with leading cloud service providers.
Moody's expects VNET's revenue to grow around 10% over the next 12-18 months, driven primarily by the growth of new cabinets and increasing utilization of its existing cabinets. The company's revenue rose 14% in 2022 and 8% over the first half 2023, respectively.
Moody's forecasts the company's adjusted EBITDA margin will remain around 35% over the next 12-18 months. At the same time, the agency projects that the company will incur additional debt to fund its planned capital spending.
As a result, Moody's expects VNET's debt leverage, as measured by Moody's-adjusted debt-to-EBITDA, to stay elevated at around 6.0x over the next 12-18 months before gradually deleveraging as the utilization of its new cabinets improves and the company's investment gap narrows.
VNET's liquidity position is weak. It had an unrestricted cash balance of RMB2.36 billion as of the end of June 2023, which combined with its expected operating cash flow, will be insufficient to cover its planned capital spending and upcoming debt maturities, including $600 million (around RMB4.2 billion) of convertible bonds, that will become puttable in February 2024.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, GOVERNANCE (ESG) CONSIDERATIONS
VNET's Credit Impact Score of CIS-5 is driven by governance risks. The governance risks reflect its aggressive financial policy in the context of business expansion amid its weak liquidity, its delays in executing its refinancing plans amid a tight funding environment, its sustained high financial leverage and its large financing needs.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
Moody's could upgrade VNET's rating if the company demonstrates its ability to refinance its upcoming maturity of $600 million convertible bonds with a puttable date in February 2024, while maintaining steady operations.
On the other hand, Moody's could downgrade VNET's rating if the company is unable to service its debt maturities.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Communications Infrastructure published in February 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/379527. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
VNET Group, Inc. (VNET) began operations in 1999 and listed on the NASDAQ in 2011. The company is headquartered in Beijing and is China's largest carrier- and cloud-neutral IDC services provider, operating in more than 30 cities. It also provides interconnectivity services and complementary value-added services, such as cloud services, virtual private network services and hybrid IT services.
