Moody's downgrades Montgomery County MUD 36, TX's ratings to A3; outlook negative
New York, August 17, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded Montgomery County Municipal Utility District 36, TX's rating to A3 from A2. A negative outlook has been assigned. The district has approximately $1.4 million in debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The downgrade to A3 reflects the district's weak governance leading to multiple years of operating deficits and declining reserves that are very narrow in comparison to similarly rated peers. The rating also reflects the district's moderately sized and built out tax base which is favorably located within the Woodlands. Further, the district benefits from a very low debt burden with no plans for additional debt. Governance considerations are material to the credit profile.
RATING OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the declining reserve levels that are below median levels and projected to decline further with fiscal 2023 operations. Inability to increase revenues sufficient to cover annual operating costs and improve reserve levels could result in further downward rating action.  
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
- Trend of surplus operations bolstering reserves
- Material increase of taxable values
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
- Continued trend of operating deficits leading to further narrowing of reserves
- Significant decline of the district's taxable values
- An increase in debt without a commensurate increase in reserves
LEGAL SECURITY
Principal and interest on the bonds are payable from the proceeds of an annual ad valorem tax, without legal limitation as to rate or amount, levied against all taxable property within the district.
PROFILE
Montgomery County MUD 36 is located 30 miles north of Houston (Aa3 stable) within the boundaries of Conroe Independent School District (Aa1 stable) and the community known as the Township of the Woodlands (Aa1). Population is estimated to be 7,500.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
