Moody's confirms S4B (Issuer) Plc's bond rating at Baa1, outlook negative
London, September 01, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today confirmed at Baa1 the underlying rating on the GBP73.5 million guaranteed fixed rate senior secured bonds due 2037 (the Bonds) issued by S4B (Issuer) Plc (the Issuer). The outlook is negative. This concludes the review for downgrade initiated on 27 June 2023.
The Issuer is a funding vehicle for S4B Limited (S4B, ProjectCo), which holds a PFI contract with The Council of the City of Manchester (the Council) for the development and management of social housing on the Brunswick estate in Manchester. The Issuer and ProjectCo are both wholly owned by S4B (Holdings) Limited (HoldCo).        
      RATINGS RATIONALE
The confirmation of the rating reflects the restoration of S4B (Issuer) Plc at the Companies House register, following the publication of audited financial accounts for the period ending March 2022, ahead of the next September 2023 payment date, and in line with management expectations. This compliance and reporting issue is reflected in our updated G-3 governance score and updated CIS-3 ESG Credit Impact Score. Please refer to Moody's General Principles for Assessing Environmental, Social and Governance Risks Methodology.
The negative outlook reflects the ongoing uncertainty on the timing and magnitude of any deductions actually applied by the Council. The Council has claimed a £1.7 million unavailability deduction, representing approximately 20% of the Unitary Payment for 2022/2023, for certain deficiencies in lighting, doors and gates. ProjectCo does not consider that these deductions are justified under the payment mechanism, and has obtained an external legal view that supports this. Any deductions may ultimately be fully passed through to Mears, the FM subcontractor. The Council and ProjectCo have arranged joint board meetings to address the issue.
S4B (Issuer) Plc's credit quality is supported by (1) the long-term project agreement (PA) that S4B (Solutions 4 Brunswick) entered into with the Council, providing a stable availability-based revenue stream; (2) straight-forward facilities maintenance (FM) obligations comprising reactive and planned maintenance, standard soft FM services such as cleaning of communal areas for residential housing, and housing management; (3) satisfactory operational service performance to date, with modest deductions and consistent rent collection rate above the target (98%); and (4) a range of creditor protections included within the project's financing structure, such as security, debt service and maintenance reserves and shareholder distribution tests.
However, credit quality is constrained by (1) the Issuer's high leverage; (2) a relatively limited operating track record, (3) track record of severe delays in the publication of its financial accounts, although now resolved, and (4) uncertainty around the application of the payment mechanism in regards of communal areas going forward.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
FACTORS THAT WOULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE
An upgrade is currently unlikely in view of the negative outlook.
FACTORS THAT WOULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE
The level of penalties applied by the Council and determined as appropriate, are such that they impact materially on the financial metrics, the available liability cap of the FM contractor, our view of the future deductions under the payment mechanism, or the view on breaching termination thresholds.
There is a sustained trend of rent collection falling below the 98% level, and where there is an expectation that the financial consequence of this will be primarily borne by ProjectCo.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Operational Privately Financed Public Infrastructure (PFI/PPP/P3) Projects published in March 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/400755. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
