Moody's places PRA Group's Ba2 senior unsecured debt rating on review for downgrade
London, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's)  today placed on review for downgrade the Ba1 corporate family rating (CFR) and Ba2 senior unsecured and backed senior unsecured debt rating of PRA Group, INC. (PRA). Previously, the issuer outlook was stable.              
RATINGS RATIONALE / FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The review for downgrade is driven by the underperformance of PRA's US business. During the review, Moody's will assess the potential for further strain on PRA's profitability, as well as the mitigating impact from the company's initiatives aimed at improving its collections, cost structure and revenue generation from acquired portfolios. In addition, the review will assess the financial and governance implications of the departure and replacement of the company's longstanding former CEO and CFO and any related strategic changes.
In the first six months of 2023, PRA recorded a pre-tax loss of $69.8 million, mainly driven by a negative revaluation of its portfolio in Q1 2023 due to slower-than-expected collections in the US, particularly in relation to recent vintages.  PRA's reduced portfolio income, given the combination of low investments and overcollections during the pandemic, limited the company's earnings ability to absorb such revaluations.
PRA's revolving credit facilities include a profitability covenant in the form of positive operating income (before interest expense and excluding any one-time, non-recurring or unusual charges). The company's  financial losses in Q1 2023 resulted in the covenant breach, which was waived by the lenders. While unlikely to be breached again, in absence of further meaningful negative revaluations, similar to those recorded Q1 2023, the profitability covenant limits the company's financial flexibility, particularly given its presently diminished earnings profile.
Notwithstanding the weak earnings it reported in the first six months of 2023, PRA's interest coverage levels remain solid, at 5.2x for the first six months of 2023 and 6.5x for the twelve months ending 30 June 2023.  Similarly, PRA's Debt/EBITDA leverage remains moderate despite having increased to 2.8x, the upper end of its leverage target, based on last twelve-month EBITDA. This  reflects lower EBITDA and increased utilization of credit facilities in light of material increases in non-performing loan (NPL) purchases. PRA's consolidated leverage covenant in its credit facilities limits its total leverage to 3.5x. The company has an ability to manage its leverage levels by deferring purchases of NPLs and instead using its internally generated liquidity from cash collections to de-lever.
The review for downgrade will also consider risks related to the firm's governance, in particular its financial strategy and risk management, given the underperformance of its US business, resulting weak profitability, and the sudden departures of the group's CEO and CFO.
A rating upgrade is unlikely, given that the ratings are currently on review for downgrade. PRA's ratings could be confirmed if Moody's concludes that recent management changes will not adversely affect the company's strategy, risk management or controls, and that the company's profitability challenges will be short-lived, while interest coverage and leverage remain at current or stronger levels.
PRA's ratings could be downgraded if the rating agency concludes that PRA's current underperformance in the US will take longer to resolve, which will heighten the risk related to the company's financial flexibility, given its covenant structure. The ratings could also be downgraded if PRA's debt/EBITDA leverage increases over 3x on a sustained basis, reflecting the company's weaker profitability; if strategic direction is unclear; or governance concerns are unresolved.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Finance Companies Methodology published in November 2019 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/65543 Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
