Moody's revises Whatcom County School District 501 (Bellingham), WA's outlook to negative; affirms Aa3 issuer and GO and assigns Aa3 UND/Aaa ENH to GO bonds
New York, August 16, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service revised the outlook on Whatcom County School District 501 (Bellingham), WA 's underlying rating to negative and affirmed the district's Aa3 issuer and general obligation unlimited tax  (GOULT) ratings. Moody's also assigned Aa3 underlying and Aaa enhanced ratings to the district's Unlimited Tax General Obligation and Refunding Bonds, 2023, which have an expected par amount of about $109 million. Following the issuance, the district will have roughly $367 million in GOULT bonds outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Aa3 issuer rating reflects the district's healthy local economy with strong full value per capita, average resident incomes, flat to modestly growing enrollment and the presence of Western Washington University (A1 negative). The district's reserves are narrow compared to national peers and are likely to decline with deficits over the next two years. Positively, the district benefits from consistent local voter support for its supplemental levies. Long-term liabilities are moderate and fixed costs are modest.
The district's financial disclosure is weaker than peers nationally because it does not disclose other post-employment benefit liabilities, capital asset values or depreciation. However, this is allowed by Washington state law and the district follows the 'Regulatory Basis of Accounting' as directed by the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI).
The district's general obligation bonds are rated Aa3, the same level as the issuer rating, based on the district's general obligation full faith and credit pledge, as well as an unlimited property tax that is dedicated to debt service.
The Aaa enhanced rating is based on the bonds' participation in the Washington State School Bond Guarantee Program (Aaa). Under this program, the state pledges its full faith, credit, and taxing power to guarantee debt service when due on qualified school districts' voter-approved general obligation bonds. The program rating reflects the pledge of the State of Washington (Aaa stable) and strong program mechanics to ensure timely debt service payments on participating bonds.
RATING OUTLOOK
The district's outlook is negative because its narrow reserves relative to national peers are likely to further decline over the next two fiscal years. If realized, the maintenance of lower reserve levels could result in a downward rating movement.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Improvement of resident income levels
-     Sustained growth of reserves
-     Material reduction in leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Sustained enrollment declines
-     Deterioration of reserves
-     Growth of leverage beyond current expectations
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's GOULT bonds are backed by the district's full faith, credit and unlimited property tax pledge. Bondholder security is enhanced by the county-provided lockbox for GOULT debt service.
The Washington State School Bond Guarantee Program pledges its full faith and credit to make whole any shortfall in debt service by the district, if necessary, on a timely basis for payment to bondholders.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds from the bonds will be used to finance the renovation, upgrade and new construction of school facilities. Bonds proceeds will also refund the district's outstanding Unlimited Tax General Obligation Bonds, 2013.
PROFILE
Whatcom County SD 501 (Bellingham) is located in northwest Washington, 21 miles south of the Canadian border and 88 miles north of Seattle (Aaa stable). The district had fiscal 2022 enrollment of about 11,500 students across all programs, including fourteen elementary schools, four middle schools, three high schools and one alternative high school.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the issuer and underlying ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. The principal methodology used in the enhanced rating was Guarantees, Letters of Credit and Other Forms of Credit Substitution Methodology published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386295. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
