Moody's downgrades Liquid Telecom's rating to B3; outlook negative
Madrid, August 21, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today downgraded Liquid Telecommunications Holdings Limited's (Liquid Telecom or the company) corporate family rating (CFR) to B3 from B2. Moody's has also downgraded to B3 from B2 the instrument rating on the $620 million backed senior secured notes due 2026 issued by Liquid Telecommunications Financing plc. The rating outlook was changed to negative from stable.
A full list of affected ratings is provided towards the end of this press release.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Today's rating action reflects Moody's concerns about the absence of a track record of sustainable growth and free cash flow generation that is needed to enable Liquid Telecom to sufficiently reduce leverage organically ahead of the maturity of its sizable $620 million bond due in September 2026. Since the end of the company's financial year 2020, EBITDA outside of Zimbabwe has barely grown despite ongoing high capex spending. This heightens refinancing risk if the company's level of indebtedness remains high and the interest rate environment is elevated over the coming years.
The B3 rating also reflects Moody's view that Liquid Telecom continues to have time to work on solutions to mitigate its refinancing risk and that liquidity risk remains manageable over the next 12-18 months. The company has announced it is considering asset sales and expects to increase free cash flow generation through operational improvements and a reduction in capex. Both could contribute towards deleveraging and improving access to financing and thereby keep debt servicing sustainable, however at this stage there is uncertainty on the successful execution of these measures.
Should interest rates remain high, Moody's expects that the company will be required to pay materially higher interest expense on its debt when it is refinanced. This will put further pressure on the ability of the company to generate free cash flow and will lead to a weakening of the company's (EBITDA – capex) / interest expense ratio to significantly below 1x when excluding EBITDA and capex from Zimbabwe. As of May 2023, Liquid Telecom has $153 million remaining debt outstanding under its $220 million amortizing rand-denominated term loan, on which it has fixed the rate at around 11.5% and $620 million of backed senior secured notes with a coupon of 5.5%. The loan matures in February 2026 and the notes in September 2026.
Moody's expects the company to achieve some operational improvements and marginally positive free cash flow generation outside of Zimbabwe over the next 2 years. This could improve slightly if the company is able to increase the amount of cash upstreamed from Zimbabwe to a range of $2 million - $4 million per month, as expected by management. Therefore, cash generated from operations alone will not be sufficient to achieve the deleveraging required to make interest payments sustainable at higher rates. If operational improvements are significant though and put the company on a credible path for growth in dollar terms, access to financing could improve, lower the rate required for a refinancing and thereby also contribute towards making the capital structure more sustainable. Moody's expects however that some additional debt reduction will be needed even if the company started generating more meaningful positive free cash flow.
Moody's views the elevated refinancing risk, combined with the uncertainty over how it will be addressed by management, as a governance risk. To reflect the increase in this risk the ESG issuer profile score for governance was changed to G-4 from G-3 and the ESG credit impact score was changed to CIS-4 from CIS-3. The CIS-4 indicates the rating is lower than it would have been if ESG risk exposures, notably related to governance, did not exist.
Liquid Telecom's B3 CFR continues to reflect its (1) strong market position as the largest pan-African fibre network covering more than 20 countries across central, eastern and southern Africa; (2) valuable high-capacity long-haul fibre network assets spanning over 100,000 km; (3) exposure to supportive industry dynamics, given the growing demand for carrier and enterprise broadband services across Africa; and (4) long-standing contractual relationships with a blue-chip customer base with moderate customer concentration and low customer churn.
The rating is constrained by (1) Liquid Telecom's presence in countries with high geo-political risk and weak institutional strength, as is the case in Zimbabwe which continues to face currency weakness, hyperinflation and dollar illiquidity; (2) some exposure to currency risks because of a mismatch between local currency cash flow and dollar debt obligations although the issuance of an approximately $200 million equivalent rand denominated term loan in 2021 has reduced this risk; and (3) elevated debt/ EBITDA leverage of 5.1x as of the twelve months ending May 2023 when excluding operations in Zimbabwe; and (4) negative to low free cash flow generation because of significant expansionary investment into its fibre network, even though capital expenditure will reduce over time.
NEGATIVE OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the risk that a continued absence of sustainable growth and free cash flow generation would heighten refinancing risk, particularly if interest rates remain high or there is underperformance in the business.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Given the negative outlook, an upgrade is unlikely at this time. Moody's could revise the outlook to stable if the company (1) addresses refinancing of its 2026 maturities well ahead of their maturities; or (2) reduces leverage such that (EBITDA – capex) / interest expense would sustainably remain above 1x (excluding Zimbabwe EBITDA and capex) despite higher expected interest rates after a refinancing. A change of the outlook to stable would likely also require the company to generate positive free cash flow in dollar terms on a sustainable basis.
Moody's could downgrade the rating if a credible plan to address the 2026 debt maturities is not proposed well ahead of their maturities, or if leverage is not reduced to sustainable levels at which a refinancing with adequate interest coverage of (EBITDA – capex) / interest expense above 1x (excluding Zimbabwe EBITDA and capex) would become possible. Moody's could also downgrade the rating if liquidity weakens otherwise.
LIST OF AFFECTED RATINGS
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Liquid Telecommunications Holdings Limited
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to B3-PD from B2-PD
.... LT Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B3 from B2
..Issuer: Liquid Telecommunications Financing plc
....BACKED Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to B3 from B2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Liquid Telecommunications Holdings Limited
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
..Issuer: Liquid Telecommunications Financing plc
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Communications Infrastructure published in February 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/379527. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
The local market analyst for these ratings is Lisa Jaeger, +971 (423) 796-59.
