Moody's removes negative outlook on Wausau, WI and affirms Aa3 issuer and GO; assigns Aa3 to GO notes
New York, August 15, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Aa3 to the City of Wausau, WI's General Obligation Promissory Notes, Series 2023B and Taxable General Obligation Promissory Notes, Series 2023C. The two series have expected par amounts of $11.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively. Moody's also affirmed the city's Aa3 issuer rating and Aa3 rating on outstanding general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) debt, water revenue debt and sewer revenue debt. Following the sale, the city will have about $72 million in GOULT debt, $46 million in debt pledged with water revenue and $90 million debt pledged with sewer revenue. The negative outlook has been removed.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Aa3 issuer rating reflects the city's role as a regional economic hub in north central Wisconsin (Aa1 stable) and its growing revenue base. The city benefits from a solid full value per capita, though other economic indicators including resident income levels and economic growth fall below the median for similarly rated peers. Financial reserves are adequate and somewhat muted from outstanding advances from the general fund to tax increment districts (TIDs) that are being repaid as increment becomes available. Fixed costs and long-term liabilities are elevated, driven by debt to support utility upgrades. The city's growing revenue base, particularly a significant water rate increase implemented in July 2023, will help to moderate the leverage ratio over the next several years.
The Aa3 GOULT rating is the same level as the issuer rating because of the city's full faith and credit pledge and availability of an unlimited property tax for debt service.
The Aa3 water revenue rating reflects the water enterprise's modest operating size, solid cash position and strong asset condition. The customer income profile and the ratio of debt to operating revenue is moderate. Annual debt service coverage in fiscal 2022 (year-end Dec. 31) was strong but will narrow considerably in 2023 to levels near the rate covenant once debt service begins on the system's new state drinking water fund loans. Coverage and cash will improve materially in 2024, the first full year following a significant rate increase that went into effect in the middle of 2023. The rating also incorporates certain limitations on rate increases, which are subject to approval by the Wisconsin Public Service Commission, and solid legal provisions.
The Aa3 sewer revenue rating reflects the sewer enterprise's modest operating size, solid cash position and strong asset condition. The customer income profile is moderate and the ratio of debt to operating revenue is elevated following a large issuance to upgrade the system's treatment plant. Annual debt service coverage is currently solid but will narrow considerably in 2023 as debt service ramps up on the system's new state clean water fund loans and will be near the rate covenant. The rating also incorporates the system's independent rate setting authority, track record of increasing rates and solid legal provisions.
RATING OUTLOOK
Moody's does not typically assign ratings to local government issuers with this amount of debt.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Improvement of economic indicators to levels on par with higher rated peers (issuer and GOULT)
-     Material increases in reserves (issuer and GOULT)
-     Reduction in long-term liabilities and fixed costs (issuer and GOULT)
-     Significant expansion and diversification of the customer base (water and sewer)
-     Sustained improvement of debt service coverage (water and sewer)
-     Moderation of system leverage (water and sewer)
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Deterioration of available fund balance or liquidity (issuer and GOULT)
-     Significant growth in overall leverage or fixed costs (issuer and GOULT)
-     Further deterioration of debt service coverage (water and sewer)
-     Material increase in system leverage (water and sewer)
LEGAL SECURITY
The Series 2023B and 2023C promissory notes and outstanding GOULT bonds and notes are general obligations of the city supported by the city's full faith and credit pledge to levy ad valorem property taxes to pay debt service unlimited as to rate or amount.
The water enterprise's water revenue bonds are secured by the net revenues of the city's water utility system.
The sewer enterprise's sewer revenue bonds are secured by the net revenues of the city's sewer utility system.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds from the Series 2023B notes will finance various capital improvements including street, sidewalk, storm water and certain TID projects. Proceeds from the series 2023C notes will finance acquisition of land in one of the city's TIDs.
PROFILE
The City of Wausau encompasses 20 square miles and serves as the county seat of Marathon County (Aa1), in northcentral Wisconsin. The city provides a full range of municipal services, including public safety, public works and municipal utilities, to an estimated population of about 39,000.
The water enterprise primarily serves nearly 30,000 customers within the city of Wausau and the former Village of Brokaw, which is now a part of the Village of Maine. Water is supplied from six groundwater wells, four clean water reservoirs and three elevated water tanks.
The sewer enterprise primarily serves over 15,000 customers within the cities of Wausau and Schofield. The system consists of a treatment facility and about 225 miles of sewer lines.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the issuer and general obligation ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. The principal methodology used in the revenue ratings was US Municipal Utility Revenue Debt Methodology published in April 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386721. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
