Moody's downgrades Avison's CFR to Caa2, outlook negative
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") today downgraded Avison Young (Canada) Inc.'s ("Avison") corporate family rating ("CFR") to Caa2 from B2 and its probability of default rating ("PDR") to Caa2-PD from B2-PD. Moody's also downgraded Avison's senior secured revolving credit facility to Caa1 from B2 and senior secured term loans to Caa2 from B2. The rating outlook is negative.
The downgrade reflects Avison's continued weak operating performance and constrained liquidity that has resulted in very high leverage with debt to EBITDA of over 16 times and weak coverage with EBITA to interest of under 0.3 times (over 10 times and under 0.6 times excluding preferred stock) for the LTM period ending June 30, 2023. The downgrade also considered Moody's view that liquidity remains constrained despite material cash balances as of June 30, 2023, as all of its liquidity facilities are fully drawn and we expect free cash flow to remain negative over the following 12 months. As a result, we view Avison's capital structure as unsustainable and that it will require some level of concessions from its lenders to address leverage, liquidity and cash requirements, particularly over the near term. Avison is being impacted by a very challenging macro environment where a deceleration in transaction activity is ongoing and has broadened as inflation concerns and higher interest rates conitue to drive greater caution among its customers.
The negative rating outlook reflects the potential for a protracted delay in recovery as current macroeconomic uncertainty and volatility persist, posing downside risk to the recovery of its business volume leading to an unsustainable capital structure that Moody's believes will require some level of concessions from lenders.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Avison Young (Canada) Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Caa2 from B2
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to Caa2-PD from B2-PD
....Senior Secured 1st Lien Bank Credit Facility, Downgraded to Caa2 from B2
....Senior Secured ABL Revolving Credit Facility, Downgraded to Caa1 from B2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Avison Young (Canada) Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Caa2 corporate family rating for Avison reflects the company's persistently weak credit metrics and constrained liquidity and Moody's view that the company's capital structure is unsustainable under current and anticipated business conditions and will require some level of concessions from lenders. To this end, Avison indicated it was reaching out to lenders to address current maturity concerns and also planned to explore discussions with its debtholders regarding leverage and liquidity. The rating also factors in Avison's small scale in terms of revenue relative to its sector peers and inherent cash flow volatility of its transaction business due to the high correlation to real estate and broader economic cycles. Despites these challenges we do recognize Avison's track record in expanding its operations and geographic footprint through a combination of strategic bolt-on acquisitions and organic growth since 2008.
For the 12-month period ended June 30, 2023, Avison's total debt to EBITDA was very high at over 16 times (over 10x without preferred stock) while coverage was weak with EBITA to interest expense of under 0.3 times (under 0.6x without preferred interest expense).
Avison's ESG credit impact score was changed to CIS-5 from CIS-4 driven by governance risks related to the company's weak credit metrics, constrained liquidity and Moody's view that the company's capital structure is unsustainable under current and anticipated business conditions.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Upward rating movement is unlikely in near-term and would be predicated upon Avison achieving a successful resolution with its lenders with regards to leverage, liquidity and cash requirements as well as its near term maturity profile. Specifically, an upgrade would require total debt to EBITDA of under 6.5 times and EBITA to interest expense above 1.25 times. An upgrade would also require at least adequate liquidity.
Downward ratings pressure would result in the event operating performance continued to deteriorate such that coverage of the debt deteriorated further or the company in its discussions with their lenders resulted in a distressed exchange.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Business and Consumer Services published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356424. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Avison Young (Canada) Inc. is the largest principal-owned and led commercial real estate services firm in the world, with approximately 5,000 real estate professionals in 100+ offices across 17 countries offering a full range of asset-level, investment, data and technology services to occupiers, owners, investors and the public sector in office, retail, industrial, multi-family, hospitality and other types of commercial real estate. Headquartered in Toronto, Canada, with 100+ offices including affiliates in North America, Europe, Asia, the Middle East and Africa.
