Moody's downgrades to Aa3 Custodial Receipts (Barclays), Series 2018-XL0068 A through D
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has downgraded to Aa3 from Aa2 credit enhanced rating of Custodial Receipts (Barclays), Custodial Receipts Series 2018-XL0068 A through D (the Receipts) evidencing ownership of Department of Budget and Finance of the State of Hawaii, Special Purpose Revenue Bonds, Refunding Series 2017B (the Bonds). The Receipts are supported by a letter of credit (LOC) from Barclays Bank PLC (the Bank).
RATINGS RATIONALE
Moody's reviewed the credit enhanced ratings of the Receipts following Moody's downgrade  to Ba3 from Baa1 and placement on review for downgrade of the underlying rating of the Bonds on August 18, 2023. For more information on that rating action please see the press release published on such date.
The rating of the Receipts is based upon joint default analysis (JDA) which reflects Moody's approach to rating jointly supported transactions. The JDA rating is based on the long-term Counterparty Risk (CR) Assessment of the Bank (A1(cr)) as provider of the LOC, the underlying rating of the Bonds, and the structure and legal protections of the transaction which provide for timely payment of debt service to Custodial Receipts holders. Moody's underlying rating on the Bonds is Ba3 (on review for downgrade).
Since a payment default on the Receipts would occur only if both the Bank and the obligor of the Bonds default on bond principal and interest payment dates, Moody's has assigned the rating based upon the joint probability of default by both parties. In determining the joint probability of default, Moody's considers the level of default dependence between the Bank and the obligor of the Bonds. In this case, Moody's has determined that there is a low level of default dependence between the Bank and the obligor of the bonds which results in a long-term JDA rating of Aa3 on the Custodial Receipts.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
• Moody's upgrades the long-term CR Assessment of the Bank, or the underlying rating of the Bonds.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
• Moody's downgrades the long-term CR Assessment of the Bank, or the underlying rating of the Bonds.
• Moody's determines that the default dependence between the obligor's pledge of revenues and the Bank increased.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Tender Option Bonds and Related Instruments Methodology published in May  2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/402197.  An additional methodology used in these ratings Guarantees, Letters of Credit and Other Forms of Credit Substitution Methodology published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386295.  Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
