Moody's downgrades Innovation Montessori Inc., FL's revenue bonds to Ba3; outlook Negative
New York, August 22, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded the rating on the Florida Development Finance Corporation Educational Facilities Revenue Bonds 2022 (Innovation Montessori Inc. Projects ) outstanding revenue bonds to Ba3 from Ba2.  Concurrently. the outlook has been revised to negative from stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The downgrade to Ba3 reflects the school's notably weak liquidity, which is likely to decline below the fiscal 2023 covenant requirement of 30 days cash on hand, and is well below prior expectations. While this would not constitute an event of default, it may require, at the request of a majority of bondholders, the school to hire a consultant and follow their recommendations.  The covenant increases to 45 days cash on hand at June 30, 2024, and further violation is expected absent a significant change in operating performance.  
Initial projections, provided in 2022, reflected a substantial cash increase post-issuance, in part due to Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief (ESSR) funds.  However, management has reported a delay in  ESSR funds from the Orange County School (OCS) district (Aa1/Stable), which if had been received, would have enabled the school to meet the liquidity covenant. Additionally, higher than anticipated operating expenses as the school opened its new high school, and also a modest shortfall in high school enrollment in fiscal 2023 which drove narrower margins than anticipated and providing limited headroom to the coverage covenant.  
Governance is a key credit driver of this rating action, as the school recently replaced its chief executive officer and chief business officer, with prior management having been unable to control expenses and meet budget targets.  While the school has a charter contract that extends to 2031, the recent challenges and changes may result in additional scrutiny of school operations and performance.  
Favorably,  enrollment for fiscal 2024 is stronger than  budgeted and in line with projections.  The waitlist remains solid, especially for elementary grades.  Renovations and upgrades to school facilities, while slightly delayed, have been within budget; the high school facility was completed on time last year. The school also benefits, like other charters in Florida, from an increase in local capital outlay funds due to a change in state legislation, which should help to offset growing debt service expenses over the next several years.  Likewise, Florida charter schools continue to benefit from a positive state funding environment. However, both capital outlay and operating funds are tied to per pupil enrollment.
RATING OUTLOOK
The negative outlook for the school indicates the difficulties it will encounter during the next year to enhance profit margins and meet liquidity and coverage covenants by fiscal year 2024, particularly given a rising debt service schedule. Additionally, the outlook takes into account other factors such as the potential risks associated with a new management team, and the ongoing possibility of lower-than-expected enrollment, especially at the high school.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Significantly improved liquidity providing greater cushion for operations
-     Sustained strengthening of operating performance and debt service coverage
-     Achievement of full enrollment of the high school, evidenced by ability to meet enrollment targets with a growing waitlist and improved retention
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Any further weakening of liquidity or debt service coverage levels
-     Inability to meet enrollment targets or other evidence of deterioration of the school's competitive profile
-     Additional debt issuance without strengthened reserves or operating cash flow
LEGAL SECURITY
The issuer is Florida Development Finance Corporation and the borrower is Innovation Montessori, Inc, an obligated group per the loan agreement. The obligated members, the schools, include Innovation Montessori Inc the parent of Innovation Montessori Ocoee, Innovation Montessori Ocoee High School, Innovation Montessori Ocoee Casa.
The schools obligation is joint and several, absolute and unconditional and irrevocable pledge. The schools pledge includes all adjusted revenues. Adjusted revenues include all operating and nonoperating revenues, receipts, fees, rentals, proceeds, non-restricted donations and school board payments. The school board payments including capital outlay funds are the primary source of revenue and are the principal and expected source of repayment of the bonds.
The schools receives monthly disbursements from the school board and remits this to the trustee on a monthly basis. Following the flow of funds deposit in debt service reserve fund the schools are paid for ordinary and necessary expenses of operation for the following month. The bonds are additionally secured by a mortgage on, and security interest in the borrowers facilities.
As of June 1, 2022 the obligated group agrees to have its books audited with 180 days of fiscal year end. Starting with fiscal year June 1, 2023 bond covenants include a minimum of 1.1x annual debt service coverage disclosed within three weeks of completion of the audited financial statements. The debt service ratio is available revenues of the obligated group divided by annual debt service of the obligated group. Available revenues include adjusted revenues plus gifts, grants, and donations which can be used to pay operating expenses. The liquidity ratio starts on June 30, 2023, at an amount not less than thirty (30) Days Cash on Hand, and on June 30, 2024, not less than forty-five (45) Days Cash on Hand.  for Bondholders additionally have a fully funded debt service reserve funded with cash at maximum annual debt service on the bonds.
The school has no plans to issue additional debt at this time, though bondholders benefit from an Additional Bonds Test based both on projected coverage and historical coverage. To issue additional bonds the projected net revenue available for debt service in the first fiscal year immediately following completion of the newly financed project must equal at least 1.2x on all debt or the historical net revenue available for debt service in the most recent audited fiscal year must equal at least 1.1x MADS on all debt.
PROFILE
Innovation Montessori Inc is the parent organization under which three schools operate. The three schools include a private pre-Kindergarten- Innovation Montessori Ocoee- Casa, the charter Innovation Montessori Ocoee serving kindergarten through grade 8, and the charter Innovation Montessori Ocoee High school serving grade 9 through grade 12. The schools served approximately 965 students in fiscal 2023, slightly below initial estimates. Fiscal 2024 is budgeted for 1,018 students and current expected enrollment is 1,039. The schools expect to reach maximum enrollment of 1,088 by fall 2025 as the high school becomes fully enrolled.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was US Charter Schools published in September 2016 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64397. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
