Moody's downgrades to Caa1 the LCOR Alexandria, L.L.C. Federal Lease-Backed Bonds (2001E Floating Rate); outlook negative
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded to Caa1, from Baa3, the underlying rating on the $60.2 million Federal Lease-Backed Series 2001E Floating Rate Bonds issued by LCOR Alexandria, L.L.C. for the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) in Alexandria, Virginia. The outlook remains negative. The Series 2001B-E bonds' debt service is backed by a bond insurance policy provided by MBIA Insurance Corporation, and the insured rating of Baa2 stable is unaffected by this action.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The underlying rating downgrade to Caa1 reflects the high risk of default on the senior debt as early as December 2024, when the borrower will likely be unable to make its full principal and interest payments. In that event, the bond insurance policy will be triggered to fully cover the $10.1 million mandatory sinking fund redemption. The increased risk of default is largely due to the inability, to date, of the owner/borrower to secure new tenants in the two buildings on the USPTO headquarter campus that will become vacant after August 2024. Absent new tenants, shell rent on the three remaining buildings occupied by USPTO will not be sufficient to cover senior debt service in full.
The rating further reflects the high leverage on the building relative to value, particularly  given the renewal of only 68% of the original leased space and the near-term pressures on demand for office space given  the increase of work-from-home employees, a social risk credit consideration.  
In October 2022, the General Services Administration (GSA), acting on behalf of the USPTO, gave notice that upon expiration of the current lease on the project in August 2024, the GSA will renew the lease on three of the five buildings only. Additionally, the three buildings with a definite renewal will have a new firm term lease that expires after five years, in August 2029 (with multiple as-of-right extension options from 2029 to 2044), while the debt matures in September 2032. A failure to extend the lease past the firm term would further impair debt repayment, absent the securing of a new lease, debt restructuring or an equity contribution. Further, the USPTO gave notice in the summer of 2023 that it intends to downsize its annually-renewing lease of the parking garages and commercial townhomes on the campus.
RATING OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the unlikelihood the owner/borrower will be able to fully lease the project before August 2024, which is challenged by the high degree of remote work, depressing demand for office space in the Washington DC/northern Virginia area. Further, given elevated interest rates, the terms of any debt restructuring the borrower might secure could be insufficient to match debt service to cash flows. An inability to find a solution to continue to cover debt service payments on the project's senior debt on time and in full would result in further downward pressure on the rating.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
- Firm term lease on the full project that matches the term of the debt
- A large, measurable increase in the value of the project that would increase bondholder recovery in absence of lease renewal
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
- Further devaluation of the property resulting in diminished recovery upon default
- In the absence of additional tenants, failure to restructure debt such that the shell rent in place after August 2024 would be sufficient to cover debt service
- Increased leverage on the project
LEGAL SECURITY
The Series 2001E bonds and other outstanding senior parity debt are secured by a mortgage lien on the USPTO buildings and cash flows from two leases: the main lease for the USPTO headquarters buildings, which is paid by the GSA ("GSA lease") and a smaller lease ("USPTO lease") that covers parking garages and some smaller satellite buildings.
Rent under the GSA lease in place through August 2024 is an absolute and unconditional obligation of the US Government and does not require legislative appropriation to authorize the annual payment of the lease. However, the GSA lease would not have a permanent funding source for rent payments if a federal budget were not approved. Authorization and funding of the US PTO lease rental payment is subject to annual appropriation. The leases are also subject to termination and/or abatement in the event of destruction, however base rent, which funds debt service payments, cannot be set-off.
PROFILE
The United States has the world's largest economy and is the center of global trade and finance, with a gross domestic product of $23 trillion in 2021. Its population of 328 million is third-largest.
LCOR Alexandria L.L.C., the issuer, is a limited liability company formed solely to acquire, design, lease and manage the USPTO headquarters project. The LCOR Group, a national real estate development, investment and management organization, it developed and provides property management services at the US PTO headquarters facility.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Lease, Appropriation, Moral Obligation and Comparable Debt of US Special Purpose Districts Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394969. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
