Moody's affirms Pulaski County Special School District, AR's issuer and GOLT ratings; outlook revised to negative
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed the A2 issuer and general obligation limited tax (GOLT) ratings on Pulaski County Special School District, AR. Concurrently, the outlook has been revised to negative from stable. At the end of fiscal 2022, the district had $322.6 million of GOLT debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A2 issuer rating reflects the district's narrow available reserve levels after trend of deficit operations.  The rating also reflects elevated leverage and fixed costs relative to peers, which are mainly attributable to recent debt issuances and elevated unfunded pension liabilities.  Despite these challenges, the rating considers the district's large economy supported by solid wealth and income metrics and improving enrollment.
The A2 GOLT rating is equivalent to the issuer rating, despite the limited tax pledge, due to the ample taxing headroom of over 200% in fiscal 2022, and projected coverage in excess of two times GOLT debt service for the life of the bonds.
RATING OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the anticipation of ongoing deficit operations, which will lead to the further narrowing of reserves. The inability to balance operations and build reserves back to satisfactory levels could warrant downward rating action.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Trend of surplus operations bolstering reserves
- Reduction in long-term liabilities and fixed costs
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Continued material decline in available fund balance or liquidity
- Sustained weakening of enrollment trend
- Substantial increase in long-term liabilities or fixed costs
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are payable by a limited, general obligation pledge from the district.
PROFILE
Pulaski County Special School District consists of 634 square miles mostly in Pulaski County. Additional acreage is located in Lonoke, Saline, and Faulkner Counties. District enrollment totaled 11,769 by spring 2023.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
