Moody's assigns A2 UND/Aaa ENH to Aubrey ISD, TX GOULT bonds, underlying outlook negative
New York, August 15, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a A2 underlying rating and Aaa enhanced rating to Aubrey Independent School District, TX's Unlimited Tax School Building Bonds, Series 2023, expected to carry a par value of about $27.7 million. We maintain the outstanding A2 issuer and GOULT ratings on the district. Post-sale, the district will have approximately $329 million in outstanding debt. The outlook on the underlying issuer and GOULT ratings is negative.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A2 issuer rating reflects the district's exceptionally elevated debt burden and additional capital needs spurred by enrollment growth. The rating additionally considers the district's rapidly growing economy with above average resident wealth and incomes, growing enrollment, and its stable financial position with healthy reserves and liquidity.
The A2 GOULT rating is the same as the issuer rating based on an unlimited property tax that is dedicated to debt service and levied on all taxable property within the district.
The Aaa enhanced rating is based on the rating of the Texas Permanent School Fund (PSF) and the structure and legal protections of the transaction which provide for timely payment by the PSF if necessary. Moody's currently rates the Texas Permanent School Fund Aaa.
RATING OUTLOOK
The outlook is negative because of the exceptionally elevated debt burden with slow principal amortization. The affordability of the district's long-term debt will rely on significant continued tax base growth, which may not materialize in a high inflation environment. Lower than expected or reduced enrollment or operating revenue growth that reduces affordability of the debt burden could put negative pressure on the credit.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Significant moderation of long-term liabilities, particularly the debt burden
- Sustained economic growth
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Reduced operating revenue growth that reduces affordability of debt burden
- Slowing enrollment growth
- Significant reduction in reserves
- Material growth in the debt burden and/or pension and OPEB liabilities
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are payable from a direct and continuing annual ad valorem tax levied on all taxable property without legal limitation as to rate or amount. The bonds are further payable by the Texas Permanent School Fund's commitment to pay debt service if necessary.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The Series 2023 bonds will finance various school building projects across the district, including significant renovation at the high school to increase capacity and acquisition of land for new school sites.
PROFILE
Aubrey Independent School District is located in Denton County (Aaa, stable), six miles northeast of the City of Denton. The district serves a rapidly growing residential community with an estimated population of over 11,000 and a total enrollment of about 3,000 in Pre-K through 12th grade.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the underlying rating was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. The principal methodology used in the enhanced rating was Guarantees, Letters of Credit and Other Forms of Credit Substitution Methodology published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386295. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
