Moody's affirms ConvergeOne's B3 CFR, revises outlook to negative
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") affirmed ConvergeOne Holdings, Inc.'s ("ConvergeOne") B3 corporate family rating (CFR), B3-PD probability of default rating ("PDR"), B2 rating on the borrower's senior secured first lien term loan, and Caa2 rating on the senior secured second lien term loan. The outlook was revised to negative from stable. The outlook revision reflects uncertainty around deleveraging following the introduction of high interest rate PIK notes, concerns about the liquidity profile, and refinancing risks surrounding the unrated revolver due April 2025 and first lien term loan due January 2026.
Although the supply chain constraints and the impacts of Avaya's restructuring that have led to ConvergeOne's challenged operating performance are showing signs of improvement, there is continued uncertainty surrounding the collaboration devices and meetings business line, as well as execution risks relating to growth strategies such as proprietary solutions.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: ConvergeOne Holdings, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed B3
.... Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed B3-PD
....Senior Secured 1st Lien Term Loan due 2026, Affirmed B2
....Senior Secured 2nd Lien Term Loan due 2027, Affirmed Caa2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: ConvergeOne Holdings, Inc.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The B3 CFR is constrained by ConvergeOne's elevated financial leverage arising from its active M&A strategy and recent performance challenges. Although meaningfully improved since fiscal year-end 2022, pro forma debt/EBITDA (Moody's adjusted) was high at approximately 8.5x at June 30, 2023 (inclusive of the new CVC notes), reflecting past incremental borrowings for acquisitions and supply chain constraints that are affecting both revenue and margin. Credit quality is also impacted by diversification risk given considerable reliance on key vendors, a factor that has been exacerbated by supply chain issues. Moreover, ConvergeOne's concentrated private equity ownership presents risks relating to corporate governance and financial strategy. Potential debt-financed acquisitions, which have been integral to ConvergeOne's expansion efforts, could constrain deleveraging, although Moody's expects M&A to be subdued in the near term until operating performance normalizes.
These governance risks are somewhat mitigated by the company's track record of integrating acquired businesses and achieving targeted synergies, as well as the company's cost actions and the overall variability of its cost structure. Additionally, ConvergeOne benefits from its solid communications solutions and managed IT services market position and diverse customer base. The CFR is further supported by the company's recurring maintenance and managed services sales (approximately half of revenues). Meanwhile, the company's typical low-to-mid-teens adjusted EBITDA margin in conjunction with modest capital expenditure requirements supports healthy free cash flow generation on a normalized basis, although cash flow has been challenged in recent quarters as revenue and margin has been below expectation.
The B2 rating for ConvergeOne's first lien term loan reflects the borrower's B3-PD probability of default rating ("PDR"). The first lien term loan rating is one notch above the CFR and considers the instrument's junior collateral position relative to ConvergeOne's unrated asset-based revolving credit facility. The revolver has a superior claim on the company's cash, receivables, and inventory. At the same time, the first lien debt ranks senior to ConvergeOne's Caa2 rated second lien term loan. Any incremental priority trade payables or debt that is deemed senior to the first lien term loan could put additional downward pressure on the term loan rating.
ConvergeOne's adequate liquidity reflects a modest $15 million cash balance as of June 30, 2023. Liquidity is supported by the availability of around $65 to $100 million under the company's $250 million asset-based revolving credit facility (unrated). Availability on the revolver is limited by floor plan advances and a minimum liquidity requirement of $15 million. The revolving credit facility matures in April 2025. While the company's term loans are not subject to financial covenants, the revolving credit facility has a springing covenant based on a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1x.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be upgraded if ConvergeOne continues to diversify its supplier base, meaningfully increases scale while maintaining profit margins, and reduces adjusted debt to EBITDA to below 6x on a sustained basis.
The ratings could be downgraded if revenue contracts materially from current levels, sustained free cash flow deficits materialize, or if ConvergeOne adopts more aggressive financial policies, leading to increased debt leverage or expectations for diminished liquidity. In addition, ratings pressure could arise if the upcoming debt maturities are not refinanced in a timely manner.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Business and Consumer Services published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356424. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
ConvergeOne, owned by CVC Capital Partners following an LBO completed in early 2019, is a provider of integrated communications solutions and managed services. The company generated sales of under $1.5 billion in the LTM period ending June 31, 2023.
