Moody's downgrades PTTGC to Baa3; outlook remains negative
Singapore, August 22, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded PTT Global Chemical Public Company Limited's (PTTGC) issuer rating to Baa3 from Baa2.
At the same time, Moody's has downgraded (1) to Baa3 from Baa2 the rating on the backed senior unsecured notes issued by GC Treasury Center Company Limited (GCTC), a wholly-owned subsidiary of PTTGC; (2) to (P)Baa3 from (P)Baa2 the senior unsecured medium-term note (MTN) program rating under PTTGC; and (3) to (P)Baa3 from (P)Baa2 the backed senior unsecured MTN program rating under GCTC. Any issuance under the MTN program by GCTC will be unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by PTTGC.
The outlook on all ratings remains negative.
"The downgrade reflects our expectation that over the next 12-18 months, PTTGC's leverage will unlikely decline to the levels appropriate for its previous ratings," says Hui Ting Sim, a Moody's Assistant Vice President and Analyst.  
"The negative outlook reflects the uncertainty over the company's pace of deleveraging and debt reduction amid challenging market conditions in the petrochemical sector," adds Sim, who is also Moody's lead analyst for PTTGC.
RATINGS RATIONALE
PTTGC's leverage, as measured by debt/EBITDA, was close to 21.0x during the 12 months ended June 2023. The spike in leverage was driven by weak earnings generation in the past 12 months combined with high debt levels following its primarily debt-funded acquisition in December 2021 of global resin producer, Allnex Holding GmbH. PTTGC's adjusted EBITDA fell to THB15 billion during the 12 months ended June 2023 from THB27 billion and THB64 billion in 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Moody's views that PTTGC's ability to reduce its borrowings through internal cash flows over the next 12-18 months will continue to be hampered by challenging industry conditions that will pressure petrochemical margins. The agency expects demand for petrochemicals will likely remain soft as global economic growth slows this year and remains subdued in 2024. At the same time, petrochemical supply will grow significantly this year as new capacities come on stream.
Moody's expects PTTGC's earnings should increase gradually over 2023-24 from exceptionally weak levels over the past 12 months. The agency estimates that PTTGC's adjusted EBITDA will be THB30 billion and THB43 billion in 2023 and 2024, respectively.
PTTGC's adjusted debt fell by close to THB20 billion to THB306 billion as of June 2023 from the previous year as the company used some of its cash on hand to repay debt, but its adjusted net debt increased by around THB22 billion to THB274 billion during the period. Moody's expects PTTGC will generate free cash flow of THB7 billion and THB12 billion in 2023 and 2024, respectively, which will support debt reduction of about THB10 billion by December 2024 from June 2023. However, such debt levels are high for PTTGC's current rating level as Moody's estimates that the company's debt/EBITDA will remain in excess of 5.0x in 2024.
PTTGC's Baa3 ratings are underpinned by its position as Thailand's largest diversified petrochemical company, as well as by its long-term feedstock supply and product offtake agreements with its parent, PTT Public Company Limited (PTT, Baa1 stable). At the same time, the ratings are constrained by PTTGC's high leverage and exposure to the inherent volatility in the refining and petrochemical sectors.
The Baa3 ratings continue to incorporate two notches of uplift, based on Moody's assessment of likely extraordinary support from its parent, PTT, during a period of stress.
LIQUIDITY
PTTGC has very good liquidity. As of 30 June 2023, the company held cash of THB28 billion and short-term investments of THB6 billion. These cash sources, along with the company's projected cash flow from operations of about THB42 billion over 18 months to December 2024, will be sufficient to meet its projected capital expenditure, dividends and debt repayment during the same period. The company has good access to credit markets as a result of its close links with PTT.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
An upgrade of PTTGC's Baa3 ratings is unlikely over the next 12-18 months, given the negative rating outlook.
Nevertheless, Moody's could return the outlook on the ratings to stable if PTTGC reduces its leverage faster than the agency's expectation. This could happen if (1) the company's chemical and refining margins improve, such that it is able to generate higher cash flow to pare down debt; or (2) PTTGC takes measures such as raising equity or asset divestments to reduce its borrowings.
Specific credit metrics that could support a return of the outlook to stable include adjusted debt/EBITDA declining below 4.5x-5.0x or adjusted EBITDA/interest rising above 5.0x.
On the other hand, Moody's could downgrade PTTGC's ratings if (1) its chemical margins remain weak over a prolonged period, preventing the company from deleveraging; (2) the company undertakes large investments or increases its returns to its shareholders, such that it significantly undermines its credit profile; or (3) the rating agency reduces the uplift for extraordinary parental support because of a change in the links between PTTGC and PTT.
Quantitative metrics that could lead to a rating downgrade include (1) adjusted debt/EBITDA above 4.5x-5.0x; or (2) adjusted EBITDA/interest less than 5.0x, both on a sustained basis.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Chemicals published in June 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/389870. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
PROFILE
PTTGC is the chemical flagship of Thailand's national oil company, PTT Public Company Limited. It is primarily engaged in the production and distribution of petroleum, aromatics and olefins products.
PTTGC has a refining capacity (including condensate) of 280,000 barrels per day and a combined petrochemical nameplate capacity of 14.23 million metric tons per year. The company also started producing industrial coating resin, following its acquisition of Allnex in December 2021.
As of June 2023, PTT was PTTGC's largest shareholder, with an effective ownership stake of 48%.
