Moody's downgrades Washington Township HCD, CA's GOULT to A2 and assigns A2 to 2023 Series B; outlook revised to stable
New York, August 23, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned an A2 rating to Washington Township Health Care District's (Alameda County, California) 2020 Election General Obligation Bonds, 2023 Series B. Concurrently, Moody's has downgraded to A2 from A1 the general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) rating for Washington Township Health Care District (WTHCD) and revised the outlook to stable from negative. The 2023 Series B GOULT bonds are expected to be issued in the approximate amount of $125 million. The district has close to $337.3 million in currently outstanding GOULT obligations.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The downgrade to A2 reflects expectations of still modest financial performance in fiscal 2024 and the increase in debt from the 2023 Series A revenue bonds (Baa3 stable) that will result in suppressed days' cash and cash to debt. A new management team has identified a number of strategies to improve financial results that it expects to take hold over the course of the next 12 - 18 months that could more than double operating cash flow by fiscal 2025. The rating remains anchored by continued growth in the district's large and diverse tax base that now approaches $93.9 billion and above average wealth levels supported by the strong regional economy of San Francisco's Bay Area and Silicon Valley. The rating also incorporates WTHCD's leading market position and favorable community support with voter approval of GOULT debt to aid with capital investments. WTHCD's ad valorem debt burden will remain manageable given ongoing tax base growth, and issuances will fund strategic capital investments. However, WTHCD will continue to face a high adjusted pension burden (per Moody's calculations) and cash contributions to the plan will continue to stress liquidity and operating performance metrics.
The GOULT rating also reflects the unlimited property tax pledge and the county's well-established collection and disbursement practices for the property taxes securing the bonds.
RATING OUTLOOK
Revision of the outlook to stable at the lower rating level anticipates that the organization will improve operations and grow volumes such that operating cash flow will gradually improve in fiscal 2024 and stabilize liquidity at about current levels.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Sustained strengthening of operating cash flow margins to high single digit
-     Material growth in cash reserves and cash on hand and cash to debt that are over 175 days and 150%
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Inability to show quarter-to-quarter improvement in operating cash flow
-     Significant decline in liquidity over current levels
-     Notable increase in revenue backed debt
LEGAL SECURITY
The general obligation bonds are secured by the district's voter-approved, unlimited, ad valorem property tax pledge. Alameda County (Aaa stable), rather than the health care district, levies, collects and disburses the district's property taxes securing the bonds to the paying agent. The Bonds are not secured by revenues from the district's operations.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The 2023 Series B GOULT bonds represent the second issuance of a $425 million authorization approved by district voters in November 2020. Bond proceeds will fund various capital projects including seismic improvements to the hospital to ensure compliance with state requirements. Following the issuance, the district will retain $280 million in unissued GOULT authorization to support its master facility plan.
PROFILE
The district is a political subdivision of the State of California encompassing the cities of Fremont, Newark, and Union City, and portions of Hayward and Sunol. The population of the district's primary service area is estimated at close to 350,000. The district operates a 415-bed acute care hospital (located in Fremont), providing a wide variety of standard and high-tertiary inpatient and outpatient services, and contracts with a 97-member physician foundation.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. An additional methodology used in these ratings was Not-For-Profit Healthcare published in December 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70886. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
