Moody's confirms Allied Properties' Baa3 ratings, outlook is negative
New York, August 16, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") today confirmed Allied Properties Real Estate Investment Trust's ("Allied" or "the REIT")  issuer and senior unsecured debt ratings at Baa3 following the completion of the previously announced sale of three data center properties. The rating action reflects the REIT's improved liquidity and modest improvement in its net debt to EBITDA ratio. This action concludes the review for downgrade initiated on June 23, 2023 when Allied announced the data center transaction.
The outlook for the ratings is negative due to the challenging environment for office leasing because of the increased adoption of hybrid work, and the high likelihood that net debt to EBITDA and fixed charge coverage would remain weaker than expectations for the Baa3 rating.
Confirmations:
..Issuer: Allied Prop. Real Estate Investment Trust
.... Issuer Rating, Confirmed at Baa3
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Confirmed at Baa3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Allied Prop. Real Estate Investment Trust
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Rating Under Review
RATINGS RATIONALE
The ratings reflect Allied's high quality portfolio of office properties in primary office markets in Canada, its diverse tenant base, and good liquidity relative to its capital needs over the next 12-18 months, while considering weak net debt to EBITDA and fixed charge coverage metrics.  Other important rating considerations are the challenging operating environment that has resulted in a meaningful decline in the REIT's portfolio lease rate, large but materially pre-leased development pipeline, and the difficult financing environment for commercial real estate landlords, especially the office property owners.
The sale of the three data center assets to KDDI Corporation, the Japanese telecommunications provider, for CAD $1.35 billion, CAD $118 million above IFRS net value as of Q1 2023, has bolstered Allied's liquidity and would modestly improve its aggregate leverage metrics. The REIT will use the $1.35 billion of proceeds to fully pay down the balance on its unsecured credit facility, retire the $200 million promissory note upon its maturity in December 2023, $49 million to retire its remaining first mortgages on fully owned properties, and to fund ongoing development and redevelopment.
Moody's expects that the REIT's net debt to EBITDA will be in the high 8x range and fixed charge coverage would be about 2.4x at YE 2023. These metrics would improve modestly in 2024 with income from recently stabilized/to be stabilized properties despite modest income loss due to lease expirations. Allied's effective and secured leverage metrics are modest, and the REIT has a sizeable, unencumbered asset base.
The REIT's office portfolio occupancy has declined by 250 bps since YE 2021 in large part due to the structural changes in demand for office space and the difficult leasing environment. The diverse tenant base, largest ten tenants accounted for 19% of rental revenue, and the laddered lease maturity schedule, leases related to 12.3% of its gross leasable area are expiring through year-end 2024, reduce the risk presented by the challenging leasing environment.
The REIT's portfolio occupancy has been equal to or higher than the market average in most metropolitan areas because of the quality of its portfolio. The one exception is its Toronto/Kitchener portfolio, which accounted for 48% of net operating income from continuing operations, where it was about 2-3% below market occupancy at the end of Q2 2023.
Liquidity has been a credit negative over the last few quarters given the limited availability on its unsecured credit facility, $125 million available on the $800 million facility at the end of Q2 2023, relative to its debt maturity and capital needs related to the development pipeline. The data center portfolio sale has mitigated those concerns and the key liquidity considerations over the next 4-6 quarters would be the trajectory of operating cash flows and the recast of the revolver that matures in Jan 2025.
The negative outlook reflects the Moody's expectation that the transition to hybrid work will weigh on office leasing activity, and the lack of recovery in earnings would result in net debt to EBITDA and fixed charge coverage remaining weaker than expectations for the rating over the next 12-18 months.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be downgraded if weak operating metrics persist, such as occupancy below 85% or negative same-asset NOI on a sustained basis, or the REIT experiences a deterioration in liquidity or diminished capital access. High net debt to EBITDA, remaining above 8.5x, or weak fixed charge coverage, below 2.4x, due to operating weakness or a more aggressive capital strategy could also result in a downgrade.
A ratings upgrade is unlikely and would require net debt to EBITDA below 7.5x and fixed charge coverage above 3.2x on a sustained basis. Occupancy above 90%, same-asset NOI growth greater than 3% and solid liquidity would be other considerations.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was REITs and Other Commercial Real Estate Firms published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393395. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Headquartered in Toronto, Canada, Allied Properties Real Estate Investment Trust (TSX:AP.UN) is a REIT that owns, manages, and develops office properties in Canada's major cities. As of June 30, 2023, the REIT's rental  portfolio consisted of 199 investment properties with 14.5 million square feet of gross leasable area in six urban markets across Canada.
