Moody's affirms Slinger, WI's A1 issuer and GO ratings; negative outlook removed
New York, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed the Village of Slinger, WI's A1 issuer and general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) ratings. The negative outlook has been removed. The village has about $14.5 million in GOULT debt.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A1 issuer rating reflects the village's healthy financial position and above average resident income profile and full value per capita. Also incorporated in the rating are the village's moderate leverage and an economic growth trend that is somewhat sluggish relative to the nation. Like all cities in the state of Wisconsin (Aa1 stable), Slinger has limited revenue raising ability because of state-imposed restrictions.
The A1 GOULT rating is the same as the issuer rating. The GOULT bonds are backed by the village's full faith and credit pledge and authority to levy a dedicated property tax that is not limited by rate or amount.
RATING OUTLOOK
Moody's does not typically assign outlooks to local government issuers with this amount of debt outstanding. The negative outlook was removed due to the recent improvement in the village's finances.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Significant growth in reserves and liquidity
- Moderation of the village's long-term leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Material narrowing of operating reserves
- Significant increase in village's leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The village's GOULT bonds are full faith and credit general obligations that are payable from all available resources, including the village's collections of ad valorem property taxes which are unlimited as to rate or amount.
PROFILE
Slinger is located 35 miles northwest of the City of Milwaukee (A3 stable) along interstate 41. The village encompasses 3.8 square miles and provides a variety of municipal services to a population of about 6,000 residents.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
