Moody's appends limited default (LD) to Strategic Materials' PDR and affirms ratings, including Ca CFR; outlook to negative
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") affirmed the Ca-PD probability of default rating ("PDR") of Strategic Materials Holding Corp. ("SMI") and appended the PDR with a limited default ("/LD") designation, changing it to Ca-PD/LD from Ca-PD.  Concurrently, Moody's affirmed SMI's corporate family rating ("CFR") of Ca, first lien debt rating of Caa3 and second lien debt rating of C.  Moody's also changed the outlook to negative from stable.  
The appending of the PDR with an "/LD" designation indicates that a limited default has occurred as a result of the company not paying interest due on its first lien and second lien debt and the expiration of the applicable grace periods. The company entered into forbearance agreements on its interest and principal payments with its first and second lien lenders.  The missed interest payments beyond the grace period constitute a default under Moody's definition of default, despite the forbearance agreements. Moody's notes the first lien's forbearance expired on August 15, 2023, while the forbearance on the second lien term loan - and on SMI's unrated 1.5 lien term loan (for which the company also missed paying interest) - will expire on August 31, 2023.  While the company and its private equity sponsor (Littlejohn) continue to discuss with the lenders as to a favorable resolution to the missed interest payments and restructuring the company's debt, the continued delay in reaching an agreement is credit negative.
The negative outlook reflects Moody's view that SMI's capital structure is unsustainable and will need to be restructured in the near term considering the company's limited flexibility with weak liquidity and significant upcoming debt maturities.  Therefore, recovery could be weaker than Moody's current estimates.
Corporate governance risk was a key factor in Moody's rating action, considering the default and an aggressive financial policy with a tolerance for high leverage.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Strategic Materials Holding Corp.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed Ca
.... Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed Ca-PD /LD (/LD appended)
....Senior Secured First Lien Bank Credit Facility, Affirmed Caa3
....Senior Secured Second Lien Bank Credit Facility, Affirmed C
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Strategic Materials Holding Corp.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The ratings reflect Moody's expectation of recovery and continuing high default risk with an untenable capital structure and weak liquidity, including heightened refinancing risk. The ratings also reflect the high likelihood of a material debt restructuring as the company continues to discuss strategic alternatives with its lenders to pursue a more sustainable capital structure.  SMI has modest scale in a low growth rate industry, high financial leverage (near 9x) and negative free cash flow. Moody's anticipates that supply constraints and higher costs to acquire supply of scrap glass will continue to constrain free cash flow in the near term, along with high interest expense. The company also has high supplier and customer concentration risk, and relies on the State of California for revenue and earnings.
SMI is a leader in the niche but mature North American glass recycling market and has a footprint and processing capabilities that provide barriers to entry. Contracted demand for recycled glass (cullet) provides a degree of top-line stability. However, key end markets of containers and fiberglass/insulation are facing some volume pressure, including the negative effects of weakening economic conditions on residential construction market demand.  The company's supply of glass benefits from recycling regulations and mandates. The cost structure provides some flexibility to adjust to changes in market conditions.
Liquidity is weak considering SMI's refinancing needs with the first lien $40 million revolving facility and term loans due 2024, and Moody's expectation for free cash flow to remain negative for some time.  The revolver had almost no availability at June 30, 2023, with about $37.5 million drawn and approximately $2.4 million in letters of credit. The first lien credit agreement has provisions for a springing total net leverage ratio, tested if the aggregate amount of outstanding borrowings exceeds 35% of the facility. While the company was in compliance with the net leverage test at June 30, 2023, the headroom is very tight.  The company was not in compliance with the minimum liquidity covenant of $8 million, put in place with the 2022 extension of the revolver's maturity to 2024.  
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be downgraded if restructuring of the capital structure results in a decrease in Moody's expectation of recovery for existing creditors.  The ratings could be upgraded with meaningful improvement in earnings or debt reduction sufficient to achieve a tenable capital structure with improved liquidity.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Environmental Services and Waste Management published in May 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/402504. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Strategic Materials Holding Corp. is an environmental services company focused on recycling and processing scrap glass (over 90% of revenue), known as cullet, and processing post-industrial scrap plastic. Cullet is a necessary input to the glass manufacturing process and used across multiple end markets and product categories such as containers, fiberglass, abrasives, flat glass and a range of other industrial applications. Net revenue was approximately $276 million for the twelve months ended June 30, 2023.
