Moody's downgrades Coventry and Rugby Hospital Company Plc's bond rating to Caa2; negative outlook
London, August 17, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's)  has today downgraded to Caa2 from Ba3 the underlying rating for the GBP407.2 million index-linked guaranteed senior secured bonds (including GBP35 million of variation bonds) due 2040 ("the Bonds") issued by The Coventry and Rugby Hospital Company Plc ("ProjectCo"). The outlook is negative.
          The Bonds benefit from an unconditional and irrevocable guarantee of scheduled principal and interest from Assured Guaranty UK Limited ("AG", A1 stable). The backed rating on the Bonds is unaffected by today's action and remains A1.
RATINGS RATIONALE
On 15 August 2023, ProjectCo issued a RNS[1] stating that AG, acting as controlling creditor, had directed partial redemption of 9.8% of the Bonds, corresponding to the Coventry and Warwickshire Partnership NHS Trust's ("CWPT") facility as a proportion of the total facilities within the original Project Agreement ("PA"), following CWPT's termination of its portion of the PA on 1 February 2023. Compensation following CWPT's termination is based on estimated fair value of the PA less rectification costs. ProjectCo has originally estimated compensation at +GBP86 million, whilst CWPT had estimated compensation at -GBP40 million[2]. The parties are still in negotiations over the final compensation sum. Therefore, the 9.8% redemption will need to be funded by ProjectCo before compensation proceeds, if any, are received.
ProjectCo will be required to use monies held in its contractually required reserve accounts to fund the GBP45 million redemption.
ProjectCo was unable to fund its reserve accounts to the required balances on both the 31 December 2022 and 30 June 2023 test dates. Due to a combination of: (1) lower Unitary Payments ("UP") following the CWPT termination, which made up approximately 8% of the UP; and (2) significant cost increases following ProjectCos estimate of rectification works required at the main University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire NHS Trust ("UHCW") site, Moody's expects ProjectCo to be cashflow negative for the foreseeable future. Moody's therefore expects that ProjectCo will be unable to refill its reserve accounts to required levels, and will be required to further utilise the already depleted reserves to fund ongoing costs.
Ultimately, Moody's expects senior creditors to be reliant on AGs unconditional and irrevocable guarantee for debt service payments in the medium-term, once reserve balances have been exhausted.
The negative outlook reflects uncertainty over both the quantum and the timing of CWPT compensation, ProjectCos and its subcontractors ability to deliver the rectification works, and the subcontractors liability for those costs.
The Coventry and Rugby Hospital Company Plc is a special purpose vehicle which entered into a PA in 2002 with UHCW and the then Coventry Primary Care Trust to redevelop the acute hospital, mental health unit and medical school facilities at the Walsgrave Hospital site in Coventry, now known as University Hospital Coventry. ProjectCo is responsible for the provision of facilities management services at the Coventry site, as well as to the existing Hospital of St Cross in Rugby, until December 2042. ProjectCo is also responsible for lifecycle works at the Coventry site, but not the Rugby site.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
Given the inability for ProjectCo to raise additional revenues and the limited ability to reduce costs, Moody's does not currently foresee upwards rating pressure.
Moody's could downgrade the rating if: (1) rectification works are more expensive than ProjectCo's current estimates; (2) negotiations with CWPT over compensation become protracted or likely to result in arbitration; or (3) UHCW begin to make unavailability or performance deductions or otherwise gains the ability to terminate their portion of the PA.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Operational Privately Financed Public Infrastructure (PFI/PPP/P3) Projects published in March 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/400755. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
