Moody's downgrades four CMBS classes of MSC 2019-PLND
Approximately $114 million of structured securities affected
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service, ("Moody's") has downgraded ratings on four classes of Morgan Stanley Capital I Trust 2019-PLND, Commercial Mortgage Pass-Through Certificates, Series 2019-PLND as follows:
Cl. A, Downgraded to Aa2 (sf); previously on Sep 3, 2020 Affirmed Aaa (sf)
Cl. B, Downgraded to A2 (sf); previously on Sep 3, 2020 Affirmed Aa3 (sf)
Cl. C, Downgraded to Baa3 (sf); previously on Sep 3, 2020 Downgraded to Baa1 (sf)
Cl. D, Downgraded to B1 (sf); previously on Sep 3, 2020 Downgraded to Ba2 (sf)
RATINGS RATIONALE
The ratings on the four P&I classes were downgraded due to an increase in total loan exposure due to outstanding advances and the uncertainty around timing and outcome of the resolution of REO collateral. This floating rate loan is secured by two hotels and has been in special servicing since June 2020 as the properties catered to corporate and group business travel in downtown Portland, OR.  As of the current distribution date, the loan remains last paid through its December 2020 payment date and the aggregate outstanding servicer advances for loan interest advances, cumulative accrued unpaid advance interest and other expenses were $35.3 million which when added to the outstanding loan balance results in a total loan exposure of $275.3 million.
The portfolio's performance continues to improve but is not currently generating enough net cash flow (NCF) to cover the interest only debt service amount.  As a result, we expect the advances to remain outstanding and may increase if the property's cash flow does not continue to improve.  Servicing advances are senior in the transaction waterfall and are paid back prior to any principal recoveries which may result in lower recovery to the total trust balance.
In this credit rating action we considered qualitative and quantitative factors in relation to the senior-sequential structure and trophy/dominant nature of the asset, and we analyzed multiple scenarios to reflect various levels of stress in property values could impact loan proceeds at each rating level.
FACTORS THAT WOULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS:
The performance expectations for a given variable indicate Moody's forward-looking view of the likely range of performance over the medium term. Performance that falls outside the given range can indicate that the collateral's credit quality is stronger or weaker than Moody's had previously expected. Additionally, significant changes in the 5-year rolling average of 10-year US Treasury rates will impact the magnitude of the interest rate adjustment and may lead to future rating actions.
Factors that could lead to an upgrade of the ratings include a significant amount of loan paydowns or amortization or a significant improvement in the loan's performance.
Factors that could lead to a downgrade of the ratings include a further decline in actual or expected performance of the loan or interest shortfalls.
METHODOLOGY UNDERLYING THE RATING ACTION
The principal methodology used in these ratings was "Large Loan and Single Asset/Single Borrower Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securitizations Methodology" published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/391055. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
DEAL PERFORMANCE
As of the August 15, 2023 distribution date, the transaction's aggregate certificate balance remains unchanged at $240 million from securitization. The original 5-year (including three one-year extensions), interest only, floating rate loan is secured by fee simple interests in two, full-service hotels totaling 782-guestrooms known as The Hilton Portland Downtown (455 guestrooms) and The Duniway (327 guestrooms), located in Portland, Oregon.  The two properties are located adjacent to each other and hotel guests benefit from access to the amenities at both hotels.
The loan transferred to special servicing in June 2020 due to monetary default triggered by coronavirus outbreak induced property closures and travel restrictions as well as cancellation of groups.  The trust was the high bidder at the January 2023 foreclosure sale and the collateral became REO as of that date. The servicer commentary indicated that the strategy is to stabilize the properties prior to disposition.
The portfolio's NCF for 2019 was approximately $16.9 MM in line with the historical NCF that have ranged between $13.3 in 2014 and $19.4 million in 2018.  As a result of the pandemic impact, the portfolio did not generate positive NCF until 2022 at $6.8 million.  The year-to-date 2023 compared to the same period in 2022 exhibited continued positive cash flow trends; however, due to the current interest rate environment the floating rate loan's interest rate is above 8%, resulting in a DSCR less than 1.00X on the interest only debt service.
The updated August 2023 appraisal value of $254.8 million remains greater than the outstanding loan balance but is 14% lower than the appraisal value from June 2022 and 25% below the value at securitization. There was no appraisal reduction amount (ARA) recognized as of the August 2023 remittance date, however, the most recent appraisal value is now 7% lower than the total loan exposure of $275 million when accounting for the total outstanding advances and accrued unpaid interest amounts totaling approximately $35.3 million.
Mood's NCF was $14.2 million and the first mortgage balance represents a Moody's LTV ratio of 177%.  Moody's first mortgage stressed debt service coverage ratio (DSCR) is 0.64X.  There are outstanding interest shortfalls totaling $88,744 affecting Cl. HRR and there are no cumulative losses as of the current distribution date.
