Moody's downgrades Forest City's CFR to B3; outlook remains negative
New York, August 30, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") downgraded Forest City Enterprises LLC's ("Forest City" or "the REIT") Corporate Family Rating ("CFR") to B3 from B2 due to deterioration in its net debt to EBITDA  and coverage metrics, no remaining cushion on the fixed charge covenant related to its revolving credit facility, negative cash flow from operating activities as defined by GAAP, and weak financial flexibility. In the same rating action, Moody's downgraded the rating of the REIT's senior secured credit facility, which includes a term loan and revolver, to Caa1 from B3.
The outlook for the ratings is negative due to the REIT's weak financial flexibility and the potential that negative cash flow from operations could further weaken its liquidity position. Other significant considerations influencing the outlook are the difficult leasing environment for office properties and the challenging capital market conditions for commercial real estate, factors that are weakening Forest City's capacity to execute well-priced asset sales.
Moody's lowered Forest City's governance issuer profile score to G-5 from G-4 and its credit impact score to CIS-5 from CIS-4 due to the deterioration in its coverage metric, negative cash flow from operations, and the reliance on asset sales to maintain liquidity. Moody's also changed the company's governance sub-factor score for financial strategy and risk management to 5 from 4 for the same reasons.
The following ratings have been downgraded:
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Forest City Enterprises LLC
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B3 from B2
....Senior Secured Bank Credit Facility, Downgraded to Caa1 from B3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Forest City Enterprises LLC
....Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Forest City's B3 CFR reflects its highly leveraged capital structure, weak fixed charge coverage, and limited standalone financial flexibility. Other significant rating considerations include a high-quality and diversified portfolio of multifamily and retail properties, office buildings in the challenged coastal central business district (CBD) markets including San Francisco and New York City, the challenging financing conditions for commercial real estate, and the implicit support from its owner, the fund Brookfield Strategic Real Estate Partners III (BSREP III), and its sponsor, Brookfield Corporation (A3, Stable) that was formerly known as Brookfield Asset Management Inc.
The REIT's multifamily properties accounted for 51% of its net operating income (NOI) in the second quarter of 2023, followed by the office segment at 30% with the retail segment generating most of the remaining income. Forest City's portfolio performance and income trends reflect the broader market conditions with the multifamily and retail segments reporting steady income while its office portfolio is facing significant challenges. Occupancy in its multifamily and retail segments averaged 94.7% and 91.9% over the last four quarters while the occupancy rate for its office properties was 76.7%.
Forest City's net debt to EBITDA and coverage metrics have deteriorated in the last two quarters due to modestly higher debt levels and rising interest rates. At the end of Q2 2023, Forest City's net debt to EBITDA was 14.6x and fixed charge coverage was 1.0x, both on a trailing 12-month basis. Absent meaningful proceeds from asset sales, Moody's estimates that Forest City's net debt to EBITDA will further weaken to the 16-17x range at YE 2023 and its fixed charge coverage would decline to the 0.8-0.9x range.
Non-recourse mortgage debt on individual properties account for over 80% of aggregate debt outstanding and there are mortgages on most of the individual properties. Because the credit facility is primarily secured by equity in the properties and the meaningful amount of mortgage debt with a priority claim on the properties, the secured credit facility is rated one notch below the CFR. However, the structure provides some flexibility to the company because of the company's estimated equity value in the mortgaged properties. This equity value provides a strong incentive for BSREP III to support the company's liquidity.
There was no remaining cushion on the fixed charge coverage covenant related to the Forest City's revolver at the end of Q2 2023 and Moody's expects that the REIT will have to either add capital or complete the proposed switch to a BSREP III-provided revolver before the end of Q3 2023 to avoid breaching the covenant. The current revolver, $400 million in size, matures in December 2023 and the $600 million term loan matures in December 2025. The new revolver, expected to be $200 million of capacity, will be provided by its parent BSREP III. However, the terms would likely be more favorable to the REIT with no financial maintenance covenants. There are no financial maintenance covenants on the term loan.
Forest City expects to pay down the $210 million drawn on the revolver at the end of Q2 2023 with proceeds from incremental mortgages on a few properties, sale of an asset, and cash on hand. Usage of the new facility would depend to a meaningful degree on its ability to generate excess proceeds from asset sales to fund potential FFO deficits.
The REIT is part of a finite life fund BSREP III that was formed in 2018 and has a ten-year life. According to Moody's, the difficult capital markets conditions will influence the pace of asset sales and distributions to its investors over the last few quarters. Moody's expects that Forest City's disposition volume will grow meaningfully over the next 1-2 years because of the fund structure, and multifamily and retail properties would account for a sizeable portion of the sales.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The outlook for the ratings is negative due to the REIT's weak financial flexibility, the potential for persistently negative cash flow from operations, the difficult leasing environment for office properties, and the challenging capital market conditions will pressure Forest City's disposition volume and pricing.
Inability to execute the new revolver or lack of improvement in the REIT's liquidity could result in a downgrade. Deterioration in the portfolio performance metrics such as lease rate and releasing spreads, sustained weakness in operating cash flows, or reduction in equity value of the properties could also result in a downgrade.
A ratings upgrade is unlikely given the negative outlook and would require sustained positive cash flow from operations, fixed charge coverage above 1.1x and substantially improved liquidity including near full availability on the revolver.
Headquartered in Cleveland Ohio, Forest City Enterprises LLC, a subsidiary of Forest City Realty Trust LLC (FCRT),  is a real estate investment trust (REIT) primarily engaged in the ownership, development, management and acquisition of office, retail, and apartment real estate throughout the United States. FCRT is a guarantor of Forest City's debt and is wholly owned by BSREP III, which is 10-year life fund formed in 2018 by its sponsor Brookfield Asset Management Inc. Forest City reported gross assets of approximately $6.5 billion as of June 30, 2023.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was REITs and Other Commercial Real Estate Firms published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393395. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
