Moody's assigns Aa2 to California's general obligation bonds; outlook negative
New York, August 21, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Aa2 rating to the State of California's approximately $1 billion Various Purpose General Obligation Bonds and approximately $1.6 billion Various Purpose General Obligation Refunding Bonds. The state anticipates pricing the bonds on September 7, 2023, with the final par amount of the bonds subject to change. Moody's maintains a Aa2 rating on the state's previously issued general obligation bonds. The outlook is negative.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Aa2 rating on the general obligation bonds is the same as the state's issuer rating due to the broad pledge on the bonds, despite a constitutional priority of funding education. California's Aa2 issuer rating balances the state's massive economic base and presently healthy budget reserves and liquidity against a highly volatile revenue structure and limited operating flexibility relative to most states. The rating also incorporates above average leverage and fixed costs.
RATING OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects a weakened and uncertain revenue environment in California that raises the possibility of extended pressure on the state's budget. The state's enacted fiscal 2024 budget scaled back or delayed certain non-recurring spending in an effort to retain budget reserves. However, a more complete and accurate picture of the state's revenue collections will likely not be available until October given an allowable shift in the income tax filing deadline. The delayed receipt of revenue leaves the state with less certainty around fiscal 2024 budgeted revenues and a narrowed window in which to respond to revenue collections that fall short of present assumptions.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Given the negative outlook and the underlying challenges associated with a highly volatile revenue structure, we are unlikely to upgrade the state's ratings in the coming year or two. Revising the outlook back to stable would follow greater certainty around revenue performance and the state's capacity to balance near-term budget gaps without substantial use of reserves.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     A weakened economic and revenue environment that intensifies budgetary pressure
-     Changes in federal policy that carry an increased risk of reduced or delayed funding provided to the state
-     Material growth in the state's long-term liabilities and fixed cost burdens
-     Continued growth in school district pension contribution burdens that raises pressure on the state to expand support of schools or a general increased likelihood that the state will inancially intervene in cases of local government stress
LEGAL SECURITY
The principal of and interest on California's general obligation bonds are payable from moneys in the general fund of the state treasury, subject under state law only to the prior application of moneys in the general fund towards the state's public school system and public institutions of higher education.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds of the bonds will finance and refinance capital facilities and other voter-approved projects and costs related to the applicable bond acts, and refund certain outstanding general obligation bonds and commercial paper.
PROFILE
California is the largest state in the US based on its population of almost 40 million. The state's estimated gross domestic product is $3.6 trillion. This accounts for about 14% of US economic output and is larger than that of all but four other nations.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US States and Territories Methodology published in March 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356901. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
