Moody's downgrades Longfor's ratings to Baa3; places ratings on review for further downgrade
Hong Kong, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Services has downgraded Longfor Group Holdings Limited's issuer and senior unsecured ratings to Baa3 from Baa2.
At the same time, Moody's has placed the ratings on review for further downgrade. Previously, the outlook was negative.
"The rating downgrade reflects our expectation that Longfor's credit metrics and liquidity buffer will decline amid slowing contracted sales, continual margin pressure and still constrained funding access to the debt capital markets," says Kaven Tsang, a Moody's Senior Vice President.
"The review for downgrade reflects high uncertainties over the company's ability to improve its operating performance and recover its access to funding amid uncertain market prospects and volatile funding conditions," adds Tsang.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Moody's expects Longfor's contracted sales will weaken over the next 12-18 months, as rising uncertainties over the recovery of China's property market overshadows the stronger economic fundamentals in high-tier cities where Longfor's main operations are situated.
The recent credit distress of several Chinese developers could further dampen homebuyers' confidence in the sector, particularly in privately-owned developers, which could constrain their sales and cash flow over the next 6-12 months.
Longfor's contracted sales over the first seven months of 2023 grew 6% from last year, supported by strong growth in the first four months that was driven by the release of pent-up demand following China's lifting of tight covid restrictions and policies to support the property sector in late 2022.
Moody's expects Longfor's full-year contracted sales to decline by around 10% to approximately  RMB180 billion in 2023 from RMB202 billion in 2022 because of weaker market sentiment and homebuyers' increased risk aversion. Its contracted sales could decline further in 2024 if market weakness persists. The diminishing sales will weaken the company's revenue recognition and operating cash flow over the next 12-18 months. The company could also have to offer discounts to accelerate sales, thus lowering the profit margins of its property development businesses.
As a result, the company's adjusted debt/EBITDA will likely weaken to around 5.0x over the next 12-18 months from 4.6x in the 12 months that ended June 2023, and its EBIT/interest coverage will drop to 4.0x-4.5x from 4.7x over the same period. These credit metrics no longer support the company's previous Baa2 rating.
While Longfor's liquidity remains adequate, Moody's expects its liquidity buffer will narrow over the next 12-18 months if it is unable to recover its access to capital market funding and continue using its internal resources to repay its maturing bonds.
Specifically, the company will have around RMB12 billion of onshore bonds maturing or becoming puttable through the end of 2024. The current slow issuance in the onshore bond markets reflects privately-owned developers' constrained access to onshore debt capital markets. The volatile funding environment following several privately-owned developers' recent credit stress will also likely increase investors' risk aversion and hinder the recovery of funding access for Longfor.
The company also has offshore bank loans due over the same period. Offshore banks' weakening appetite for Chinese property developers, especially privately-owned ones, could constrain the company's ability to entirely refinance these loans.
Longfor's prudent liquidity management and maintenance of low near-term refinancing needs, through refinancing or prepayment of maturing debt, could partly temper its refinancing pressure. As of June 2023, the company had unrestricted cash of RMB71.3 billion, which covered around 2.0x of its short-term debt.
Longfor's ratings also consider its strong brand name, quality land bank in major economic regions, history of prudent business and financial management, and growing recurring rental income.
The company's recurring rental income could provide some cash flow support. Despite China's softening economic environment, which could affect consumption and the growth of Longfor's rental income, Moody's forecasts that the company's recurring rental income will grow 5%-10% over the next 12-18 months, driven by the completion and continued ramp-up of its new malls and rental houses. This recurring rental income will cover 135%-145% of Longfor's gross interest payments over the next 12-18 months, improving from 122% over the 12 months that ended June 2023.
In terms of environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors, Moody's has considered Longfor's concentrated ownership by its key shareholder, Madam Cai Xinyi, the daughter of Madam Wu, through XTH Trust, which holds a 43.36% stake in the company as of the end of June 2023. Moody's has also considered the company's track record of prudent financial and liquidity management.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Moody's will review Longfor's ability to (1) recover its funding access to debt capital markets; (2) strengthen its contracted sales and financial metrics; and (3) maintain a strong liquidity buffer amid volatile operating and funding conditions.
An upgrade of Longfor's ratings is unlikely, given the review for downgrade.
Moody's could confirm the ratings if the company strengthens its contracted sales, financial metrics and access to various types of funding at stable cost, all on a sustained basis.
However, Moody's could downgrade the ratings if the company is unable to recover its access to funding and strengthen its contracted sales. The ratings would also come under pressure if Longfor's pursues aggressive financial management, resulting in a deterioration in its financial metrics and liquidity.
Key metrics indicative of a downgrade include EBIT/interest coverage falling below 4.5x and adjusted debt/EBITDA rising above 4.5x-5.0x, both on a sustained basis.
Moody's could also downgrade Longfor's senior unsecured bond rating if the company raises a large amount of secured financing, thereby increasing the legal subordination risk.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Homebuilding and Property Development published in October 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394515. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Longfor Group Holdings Limited is a leading developer in China's residential and commercial property development sector. Founded in 1993, the company began its business in Chongqing and has established a solid brand name in the municipality.
As of the end of June 2023, Longfor had a total land bank of 54.89 million square meters (sqm) in terms of gross floor area (GFA), spanning 61 cities in five major economic regions in China.
