Moody's downgrades to A3 Forest Lake ISD 831, MN's issuer and GOULT ratings, and to Baa1 the COPs; assigns A3 UND/Aa1 ENH rating to GOULT Series 2023; assigned stable outlook on underlying rating
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded to A3 from A2 Forest Lake Independent School District 831, MN's issuer and general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) ratings and to Baa1 from A3 the district's certificate of participation (COP) rating. Concurrently, Moody's has assigned a stable outlook on the underlying rating. Additionally, Moody's assigned an A3 underlying and a Aa1 enhanced rating to the district's estimated $20 million General Obligation Facilities Maintenance Bonds, Series 2023A. Following the sale, the district will have approximately $178 million in direct debt.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The downgrade to A3 on the issuer rating incorporates the district's historically slim operating reserves that are expected to further narrow, driven by a trend of negative budget variances, however liquidity will remain adequate. Further challenges include declining enrollment and high leverage. These weaknesses are balanced against above average wealth and moderate fixed costs.
The A3 GOULT rating is the same as the issuer rating based on the district's full faith and credit pledge and the authority to levy a dedicated property tax unlimited as to rate and amount.
The Baa1 rating on the district's COPs is one notch below the issuer rating, reflecting the risk of annual appropriation and the more essential nature of the leased asset (physical education facilities).
The enhanced rating on the current bonds reflects the additional security provided by the State of Minnesota's School District Credit Enhancement Program. The Aa1 enhanced programmatic rating is notched once from the State of Minnesota's Aaa Issuer Rating. The enhanced rating reflects sound program mechanics and the state's pledge of an unlimited appropriation from its General Fund should the district be unable to meet debt service requirements. The program mechanics include a provision for third-party notification of pending deficiency. If the school district does not transfer funds necessary to pay debt to the paying agent at least three days prior to the payment due date, the state will appropriate the payment to the paying agent directly.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects Moody's expectation that the financial position will not deteriorate further beyond current expectations through fiscal 2024. A deviation from current expectations could result in a change in the rating and/or outlook.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Material strengthening of operating reserves
-     Sustained enrollment growth
-     Moderation of total leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Narrowing of operating reserves beyond expectation
-     Materially increased leverage or fixed costs
-     Downgrade of the State of Minnesota's Issuer Rating (enhanced)
-     Weakening of the credit enhancement program mechanics (enhanced)
LEGAL SECURITY
The general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) bonds are supported by the district's full faith and credit pledge and the authority to levy a dedicated property tax unlimited as to rate and amount. The bonds are additionally secured by statute.
The GOULT bonds are also supported by the State of Minnesota's School District Credit Enhancement Program which provides for an unlimited advance from the state's general fund should the district be unable to meet debt service requirements.
Outstanding COPs are supported by the district's pledge to make rental payments, subject to annual appropriation. The pledged asset is district facilities, which we deem to be more essential assets.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds of the Series 2023A bonds are being issued to finance deferred maintenance projects included in the district's ten-year facility plan and approved by the Commissioner of Education, including plumbing and HVAC in the high school and education center.
PROFILE
Forest Lake Independent School District 831 encompasses 213 square miles in portions of Washington (Aaa stable), Anoka (Aa1) and Chisago (Aa2) counties, approximately 25 miles north of the of the Minneapolis (Aa1 stable)-St. Paul (Aa1 stable) metropolitan area. It provides kindergarten through twelfth grade education to just under 6,000 students.
METHODOLOGY
      The principal methodology used in the issuer and underlying ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. The principal methodology used in the enhanced rating was State Aid Intercept Programs and Financings Methodology published in March 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356903. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
