Moody's downgrades ams-OSRAM's CFR to B2 from B1, outlook stable
Frankfurt am Main, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today downgraded the corporate family rating (CFR) and probability of default rating (PDR) of ams-OSRAM AG (ams-OSRAM or the company) to B2 from B1 and B2-PD from B1-PD respectively. Concurrently, Moody's downgraded the instrument rating of the €850 million and the $450 million guaranteed senior unsecured bonds to B2 from B1. The outlook remains stable.
"The rating downgrade to B2 reflects the weak operating performance during 2023 with slower than expected achievement in margin improvement and related high leverage for a prolonged period following the acquisition of OSRAM", said Dirk Goedde, a Moody's Vice President and Lead Analyst for ams-OSRAM. "Despite the completion of the sizeable divestment program and a major cost synergy program, the company's profitability levels and credit metrics remain outside of the requirements for a B1 rating inter alia from ongoing inventory correction", says Mr. Goedde. "Furthermore, the company invests in new production capacity that leads to highly negative free cash flow generation while facing major debt maturities in 2025 that needs to be addressed", added Mr. Goedde.
Moody's recognizes the company's implemented performance improvement measures but sees risks of lower demand from end customers amidst the recent inflationary pressure on discretionary income which could whey further on credit quality. ams-OSRAM has an adequate liquidity profile based on the expectation that the currently negative free cash flow generation will be turned-around over the next quarters.  
RATINGS RATIONALE
ams-OSRAM has recently finalized the initial divest program announced in 2020 and gained in total proceeds of around €600 million. The new management recently announced further portfolio adjustments of low margin businesses currently generating around €300-400 million annual revenues. Given the low profitability of these businesses we expect moderate divestment proceeds in 2024 of around €100 million that will support the company's liquidity and have a positive effect on operating margins in the next 24 months. As per the last twelve month that ended in June 2023, Moody's adjusted EBITDA margin was 19.1%, below previous expectations and we expect a further contraction in full year 2023 predominantly from weaker consumer and industrial markets. We forecast a recovery towards 20% by 2025 from both, the divestment of loss-making subsidiaries and profit optimization measures. This margin improvement, together with the further gross debt reduction, will likely lead to a reduction of Moody's adjusted debt/EBITDA from above 7x expected in 2023 towards 5.0x by 2025 (Moody's adjusted leverage includes the put option of the OSRAM minority shareholders). With the ramp-up of the 8" wafer fab in Malaysia we see potential upsides once Micro-LED has gained meaningful market adoption in high volume products. At the same time the ratings take into consideration the possibility that the company can shore up its capital structure by raising equity and / or successfully refinancing some or all of its capital structure.
More general, ams-OSRAM AG's B2 corporate family rating (CFR) positively reflects the company's leading market position in automotive lamps and broader LED and sensor markets; the strong secular market trends in the defined end markets, with compelling growth opportunities; the company's good diversification in terms of products and use cases across industries; and expected improvement of its EBITDA margin towards 20% in our base case. The rating further positively considers the company's solid liquidity position.
Nevertheless, the rating is constrained by its high leverage above 7x expected in 2023, which we expect to reduce below 6.0x in the next 12-18 months (Moody's-adjusted); recent negative free cash flow generation from upfront investments with uncertainty on market adoption, execution and integration risks, as well the uncertainty around the full achievability of planned cost synergies and the planned divestment, which are necessary to reduce leverage; and its high exposure to highly cyclical end markets, such as automotive and consumer electronics.
LIQUIDITY
ams-OSRAM's liquidity is adequate, supported by around €0.8 billion of cash on its balance sheet as of June 2023 and full availability under the existing €0.8 billion revolving credit facility due in September 2025. The company has around €170 million maturing debt in 2023 and in total €1.7 billion maturing in 2025 creating an elevated refinancing risk and pressure on liquidity.
RATIONALE FOR STABLE OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects our expectation that ams-OSRAM will be able to achieve profitability improvements and a recovery of the currently negative free cash flow generation, supporting an improvement of currently weak credit metrics. The stable outlook furthermore considers the company's access to capital markets that is required to address the debt maturities in 2025.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
ams-OSRAM's ratings could be upgraded if (i) the company reduces the Moody's adjusted debt/EBITDA below 5.0x and (ii) Moody's adjusted EBITDA margins is maintained around 20% and (iii) Moody's adjusted free cash flow/debt is consistently above 5% and (iv) maintenance of a conservative financial policy, focusing on debt reduction and maintenance of a good liquidity profile.
ams-OSRAM's ratings could be downgraded if (i) the company fails to address debt maturities, or (ii) Moody's adjusted debt/EBITDA remains sustainably above 6.0x or (iii) the company fails to achieve meaningful margin improvements with Moody's adjusted EBITDA-margins remains below 15% or (iv) Moody's adjusted free cash flow/debt remains negative or (v) any sign of weakening liquidity.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
ESG considerations Moody's considers include governance risks from the company's tolerance for high leverage following the acquisition of OSRAM.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Semiconductors published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74959. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
COMPANY PROFILE
ams-OSRAM AG (ams-OSRAM) is an Austria-based producer of high-performance sensors for the consumer electronics, automotive and healthcare industries, as well as lighting solutions primarily for the automotive industry. The company operates 20 production facilities with around 21,000 employees worldwide. In the 12 months that ended June 2023, ams-OSRAM generated €4.2 billion revenues.
