Moody's downgrades Praesidiad to C; stable outlook
London, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today downgraded the corporate family rating (CFR) of Praesidiad Group Limited's (Praesidiad or the company) to C from Caa3, and the company's probability of default rating (PDR) to C-PD from Caa3-PD. Concurrently, Moody's has also downgraded to C from Caa3 the backed senior secured bank credit facilities borrowed by Praesidiad Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the company. The outlook has changed to stable from negative for both entities.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The downgrade of Praesidiad's CFR and PDR reflects Moody's view that the company's probability of default, including the potential for a restructuring that Moody's considers a distressed exchange, is very high over the near term. This follows Praesidiad's announcement made on 21st August 2023[1], which disclosed a binding recapitalization agreement entered by the company and its key stakeholders. As part of the proposed transaction, current lenders will acquire the business from Praesidiad's ultimate existing private-equity sponsor Carlyle.
The proposed debt restructuring remains subject to customary regulatory approvals and is expected to conclude by the end of the first quarter of 2024. If proceeding as planned, the transaction will lead to substantially lower leverage and interest burden as a function of the expected €240 million reduction in the company's outstanding financial indebtedness (around €397 million as at 31 March 2023). As part of the agreement, lenders will also provide €25 million of interim new money debt to support the company's liquidity position (€21 million as at 31 March 2023) through completion of the transaction. Notwithstanding the additional incoming funds, the rating agency does not rule out recourse to additional measures to preserve liquidity. Upon completion, Praesidiad's capital structure will include (i) €28 million of super senior term loan facility, originating from the conversion of the interim new money debt (inclusive of 8% original issue discount and 4% exit fee) into a longer-termed facility due June 2026; (ii) €125 million of existing term loan B reinstated as a new facility at the operating company level due September 2027 and (iii) €276 million of the current existing bank facilities superseding as term loan at the holding company level due December 2027, stapled to equity and structurally junior to the abovementioned pieces of debt. Based on these transaction terms, the C ratings reflect Moody's expected recovery rate of around 30% to creditors on the existing facilities.
Moody's views the execution risk on the transaction as limited, as the new money debt is backstopped by an ad hoc group of lenders and the parties have entered into a legally binding agreement that formalises the transaction.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Governance considerations were a key driver of the rating action and reflect the lack of explicit support offered by Praesidiad's shareholders. At the same time, creditors will incur a loss through the debt restructuring and accept a structurally subordinated term loan which will reduce the company's debt burden and enhance its liquidity position. Moody's Governance Issuer Profile Score (IPS) remains G-5 (very highly negative) and the company Credit Impact Score remains CIS-5 (very highly negative).
LIQUIDITY
Praesidiad's liquidity remains weak in Moody's view despite the interim additional funding of €25 million from existing lenders to maintain adequate operational cash levels over the next few months. The company had a modest cash balance of €21 million as at 31 March 2023 and the rating agency forecasts some cash burn in the next 12 to 18 months.
RATIONALE FOR THE STABLE OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects our view that the default probability is high and appropriately captured at the current rating level.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Positive rating pressure would likely arise following the successful completion of the proposed restructuring.
Conversely, further downward rating pressure is limited given the current low rating level.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Manufacturing published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74970. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
COMPANY PROFILE
Headquartered in the United Kingdom, Praesidiad is a leading provider of outdoor perimeter security systems. The company's products are marketed under the Betafence, Guardiar and Hesco brands and cater to a wide range of end-markets characterised by high-security needs such as utilities, oil and gas, military and other high-security events, but also residential, temporary fencing, farming, cable and wire, as well as low- and medium-security perimeter protection and control products. In the last twelve months ended March 2023, Praesidiad generated revenue and Moody's-adjusted EBITDA of €290 million and €42 million respectively. The group is ultimately controlled by the Carlyle Group.
