Moody's affirms AAC Technologies' Baa3 ratings, revises outlook to negative from stable
Hong Kong, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed AAC Technologies Holdings Inc.'s Baa3 issuer rating and senior unsecured rating.
At the same time, Moody's has revised the outlook to negative from stable.
"The negative outlook reflects our expectation that the proposed acquisition of Premium Sounds Solutions will weaken AAC Technologies' financial buffers and bring execution risks. The company's leverage will rise as a result of increased debt and lower profitability due to greater expenses. Execution risks arise from integrating the target's teams and operations, which are more geographically diverse than AAC Technologies'," says Gerwin Ho, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Credit Officer.
"The rating affirmation reflects the end-market diversification and potential strategic synergies that the investment will bring over the next 12-24 months and AAC Technologies' track record of maintaining a solid capital structure and excellent liquidity," adds Ho.
RATINGS RATIONALE
On 10 August 2023, AAC Technologies announced that it had signed an agreement with Acoustics Solutions Holding B.V. and Stichting Administratiekantoor Acoustics Solutions International to buy a 100% stake in Acoustics Solutions International B.V. (ASI), which owns and operates the Premium Sounds Solutions (PSS), for up to USD525 million plus associated accrued interests.
A consideration of USD320 million plus accrued interest will be payable in cash for an 80% stake in the issued shares of ASI at the time of completion, which is expected to take place during or around December 2023. Settlement of the consideration for the remaining 20% stake in ASI will to be made in one payment and can take place either in mid-2025, mid-2026 or mid-2027. This consideration will be determined based on ASI's performance during the most recent fiscal year ending 31 March, and will comprise of a consideration of up to USD205 million plus accrued interests.
AAC Technologies will use its internal resources and a senior debt facility that the company has obtained to fund the payments. The senior debt facility consists of an up-to-twelve months' senior unsecured bridge loan facility of up to USD200 million that could be fully refinanced with a five-year syndicated senior unsecured term facility of the same consideration. The transaction is subject to regulatory and shareholder approvals.
AAC Technologies' Baa3 issuer rating reflects the company's leading positions in acoustics and haptics components, long operating history, track record of maintaining a solid capital structure and excellent liquidity.
However, the Baa3 issuer rating is constrained by (1) fluctuations in demand for its products, driven by end products that change with rapidly advancing technologies and product specifications; (2) end-market and customer concentration risks; and (3) execution risks associated with its business expansion.
PSS is a global leading provider of acoustic components and sound systems with an over 50-year operating history and has a diversified manufacturing footprint across several countries. PSS is a tier-one automotive supplier to a diversified base of global auto makers covering electric vehicle models. The company also has a sizeable portfolio of commercial relationships in the premium and branded consumer audio segment.
Moody's forecasts AAC Technologies' revenue will rise about mid-to-high single digits over the next 12-18 months, a period that spans 2023 and 2024, as compared with that in 2022, supported primarily by revenue contribution from newly acquired PSS. Revenue will also be supported by a stabilization in smartphone market demand; diversification of end markets to new areas such as the automotive sector, which will be accelerated by the acquisition of PSS; and a rising market share in the Android customer market.
At the same time, Moody's projects the company's profitability over the next 12-18 months, as measured by its EBITA margin, will reach about 5.5%-6.0% and be below the 8.0% level in 2022. This level of profitability is likely to sustain and reflects pricing pressure resulting from competition, greater revenue contribution from lower margin businesses as well as investments in research and development and new businesses.
Its adjusted debt/EBITDA will likely rise to about 3.5x over the next 12-18 months from about 2.7x in 2022, driven by broadly stable EBITDA and a rise in debt to fund the PSS acquisition and business expansion. Moody's calculation of adjusted debt includes liabilities related to the second payment for the acquisition of PSS, which is expected to occur in 2025. Moody's expects leverage to improve to about 3.1x-3.3x in 2025 as EBITDA rises and adjusted debt declines due to the completion of the second PSS acquisition payment. The company's adjusted debt as of the end of 2022 also included RMB1.7 billion of a contingent settlement provision relating to a strategic equity investment in its optics business.
The company's optical component business faces challenges in terms of pricing pressure resulting from competition, shifting product mix towards higher specification products to raise profitability, and investment required for product improvement and innovation.
These challenges are mitigated by the company's solid capital structure and excellent liquidity.
AAC Technologies' liquidity is excellent. Moody's expects that the company's cash holding of RMB7.2 billion as of 31 December 2022, projected operating cash flow over the next 12 months and cash resources from its acquisition-related senior debt facility will be sufficient to cover its short-term debt of RMB1.8 billion, short-term contingent settlement provision of RMB1.7 billion, capital spending, acquisition payment of USD320 million and associated accrued interests, as well as dividend payments over the same period.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIALAND GOVERNANCE (ESG) CONSIDERATIONS
AAC Technologies' exposure to environmental and social risks is in line with the wider manufacturing sector. In terms of governance risk, the company's conservative financial strategy counterbalances the high ownership of voting shares by its controlling shareholder and the high importance of its controlling shareholder to its operations.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The negative outlook could return to stable if the company (1) deleverages while maintaining its profitability; (2) retains its market position in the acoustics and haptics markets; and (3) continues its prudent financial management, with stable and low leverage and strong liquidity.
Credit metrics indicative of an outlook change to stable include EBITA margin remaining at 5.0% or above and adjusted debt/EBITDA below 3.5x on a sustained basis.
On the other hand, Moody's could downgrade the rating if over the next 12-18 months (1) the company's sales or market position weakens; (2) its EBITA margin falls to below 5%; or (3) its credit profile deteriorates, such that adjusted debt/EBITDA exceeds 3.5x or liquidity deteriorates, all on a sustained basis.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Manufacturing published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74970. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Listed on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong in 2005, AAC Technologies Holdings Inc. is a leading miniature components manufacturer with key products in the acoustics, electromagnetic drives and precision mechanics, sensor and semiconductor, and optics product markets.
