Moody's has changed Ascend Performance Materials outlook to negative; ratings affirmed
New York, August 18, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has changed the rating outlook of Ascend Performance Materials Operations LLC ("Ascend") to negative from stable. At the same time, Moody's has affirmed Ascend's Ba3 Corporate Family Rating ("CFR"), Ba3-PD Probability of Default Rating ("PDR") and the company's senior secured term loan at Ba3.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Ascend Performance Materials Operations LLC
....Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed Ba3
....Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed Ba3-PD
....Backed Senior Secured Bank Credit Facility, Affirmed Ba3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Ascend Performance Materials Operations LLC
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
Ascend's negative outlook reflects its weaker than expected earnings and high debt leverage relative to the rating trigger given the extended destocking cycle and lackluster demand for Nylon 6,6 and intermediates.
Moody's expects the company to sequentially improve its earnings in the second half of 2023 from the recent trough, as market conditions begin to bottom out and raw material costs have declined. However, credit metrics will remain weak for the Ba3 rating in the rest of 2023 and early 2024, given the challenging economies in Europe and China, higher interest rate environment and pricing pressure from new supplies in China.
Cost savings, fiscal prudence and liquidity management will be critical to the rating. Management has already laid out its plan to reduce manufacturing and administrative costs, slow down capital spending and tighten working capital. Subject to the execution of its business plans and the strength of an expected recovery in demand, the company has the potential to improve its adjusted leverage towards 4.0x, which is required for its Ba3 CFR, by the end of 2024.
The drastic destocking caused a severe decline in Ascend's earnings in Q4 2022 and Q1 2023. The extended destocking and raw material costs continued to carry a negative impact on Q2 2023, which improved sequentially from Q1 2023. As customer stock levels have come down significantly, a pickup in demand in the downstream automotive and electronics markets, coupled with lower raw material costs, could lead to higher production rates and improved earnings.
Liquidity remains adequate, as the company has shifted its focus to cost savings, reduced inventory and rationalized capital spending. As of June 30, 2023, Ascend had $234 million of liquidity, including $46 million in cash and $188 million available under its $500 million asset-based revolving credit facility, which will be due on the earlier of 91 days before the term loan maturity (August 2026) or October 2027. The company will rely on its asset-based revolving credit facility to cover working capital needs during the year. The revolver contains a springing fixed charge coverage ratio set at 1.00x, which will only be tested if the availability under the revolver falls below 10% of the borrowing base. Moody's expects the company to comply with the covenant. Free cash flow is likely to be slightly negative in 2023 due to the depressed earnings and increased interest expense, partly offset by a substantial decline in capital spending.
The affirmation of the Ba3 CFR reflects Ascend's leading market position in the Nylon 6,6 industry, its vertically integrated production of ADN, a key intermediate for Nylon 6,6 with high entry barriers, as well as recent investments made to improve operational reliability and meet future demand. Ascend benefits from the increased share of value-added engineering resins in its sales mix, value based pricing for Nylon 6,6 customer contracts and the penetration of electric vehicles that use more Nylon 6,6 than conventional vehicles. We expect Ascend's mid-cycle earnings to support an adjusted debt leverage of about 4.0x and operating cash flows to cover capital expenditure.
Ascend's rating is constrained by its business concentration in Nylon 6,6 chain products, the cyclical nature of the industry, as well as potential acquisitions or dividends under the private equity ownership. The company has a volatile earnings profile due to its large exposure to the automotive and electronics industries, unplanned outages at its own or competitors production facilities and differences in feedstock prices and availability. The rising interest rates will result in lower interest coverage and reduce free cash flow.
ESG factors have a highly negative (CIS-4) impact on Ascend's rating, due to the risks associated with the company's elevated debt level, opportunistic dividends, and investments needed to improve safety and reliability as well as to reduce air emissions, waste and pollution from its energy-intensive petrochemical production in order to comply with environmental regulations, reduce downtime and meet customer demands.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Moody's could downgrade the rating, if the company fails to sustain its strong market position and exhibits a prolonged period of earnings weakness, or pursues more aggressive financial policies. Adjusted debt leverage above 4x over a cycle or above 5x during a downturn, or diminishing free cash flow or a weakened liquidity profile would trigger a downgrade.
An upgrade is unlikely given the negative outlook. However, Moody's could consider upgrading the rating, if Ascend improves its business scale, diversity and reduces its earnings volatility, maintains its adjusted debt leverage consistently below 3x, generates strong positive free cash flows and is committed to more conservative financial policies.
Ascend Performance Materials Operations LLC ("Ascend") is an integrated propylene based producer of Nylon 6,6. SK Titan Holdings LLC bought the company from Solutia Inc. in 2009 and a small remaining equity interest in 2011. Headquartered in Houston, Texas, Ascend generated about $3 billion of revenues in 2022.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Chemicals published in June 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/389870. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
