Moody's downgrades Hawaiian Holdings' CFR to B2; outlook negative
New York, August 14, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") downgraded its ratings of Hawaiian Holdings, Inc. ("Hawaiian"), including the corporate family rating (CFR) to B2 from B1 and probability of default rating (PDR) to B2-PD from B1-PD. Moody's also downgraded the rating on subsidiary Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.'s Series 2013-1 Class A Enhanced Equipment Trust Certificates ("EETC") to B1 from Ba3. Moody's affirmed the Ba3 rating assigned to HawaiianMiles Loyalty, Ltd.'s $1.2 billion of senior notes secured by the company's HawaiianMiles loyalty program and its brand intellectual property ("Notes"). The speculative grade liquidity rating was lowered to SGL-2 from SGL-1. The ratings outlook was changed to negative from stable.
"The ratings downgrades reflect the inability to restore operating margins and cash flow to near their respective pre-pandemic levels," said Moody's Senior Vice President, Jonathan Root. Moody's expects an operating margin near negative two percent in 2023, which compares to 12.5% in 2019. Cash flow from operations will reach about $100 million in 2023, well below almost $500 million in 2019. "The shortfall in cash generation will weigh on Hawaiian's liquidity if it is unable to achieve a strong positive inflection in 2024," said Root. Moody's believes that recovery of Hawaiian's cash generation is being hampered by Southwest Airlines' lower pricing on inter-island flights. Hawaiian is likely booking materially lower fares on its inter-island services as compared to before Southwest's entry. Moody's estimates the annual impact to Hawaiian's operating cash generation is about $200 million. The destruction from the Maui fires this past week may prove to be another barrier to improving cash generation in upcoming months. However, vacationers continuing to choose Hawaii, though possibly foregoing a visit to Maui on their next trip, would help mitigate such pressure on cash generation.
Moody's lowered its speculative grade liquidity rating to SGL-2 because it projects free cash flow near negative $550 million in 2024, about $330 million weaker than in 2023. Investment in new Boeing 787-9 wide-body aircraft combined with Moody's current tepid assumptions for growth in earnings and operating cash flows account for the bulk of the decline. The $1.2 billion of cash on hand at the end of the second quarter provides a large cushion to absorb the weak cash flow profile and mitigates further declines in the speculative grade liquidity rating, for now.
The affirmation of the Ba3 rating assigned to the loyalty program notes reflects an increase in the first loss position in Moody's Loss Given Default claims waterfall (e.g., trade payables and other unsecured claims) compared to when Moody's first assigned ratings to the loyalty financing. The increase mitigates some of the increase in the modeled expected loss for senior secured obligations with a B2 corporate family rating, leaving the senior secured rating outcome per the LGD model at B1 notwithstanding the lower corporate family rating.
The downgrade of the EETC rating by one notch is in lockstep with the one notch downgrade of the corporate family rating. The B1 rating on the EETC reflects a loan-to-value in excess of 100%, mitigated by the importance of the collateral (six A330-200 widebody aircraft) to Hawaiian's route system over the transaction's remaining term through January 15, 2026. The one notch uplift from the corporate family rating reflects Moody's opinion that Hawaiian would affirm the financing in the event of a bankruptcy filing.
The negative outlook reflects the potential for persistently weak earnings and cash flow. Under such a scenario, excess cash on hand would fund operations and investment, rather than be used to retire debt, and further constrain credit metrics.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.
....Backed Senior Secured Enhanced Equipment Trust, Downgraded to B1 from Ba3
..Issuer: Hawaiian Holdings, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B2 from B1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to B2-PD from B1-PD
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Downgraded to SGL-2 from SGL-1
Affirmations:
..Issuer: HawaiianMiles Loyalty, Ltd.
....Backed Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed Ba3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Hawaiian Airlines, Inc.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
..Issuer: Hawaiian Holdings, Inc.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
..Issuer: HawaiianMiles Loyalty, Ltd.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The B2 corporate family rating reflects Hawaiian's competitive positions across its continental US to Hawaii; Japan, South Korea and a few countries in Oceania to Hawaii and inter-island route networks. The B2 rating also reflects the company's good liquidity that for now mitigates the strain on its operating cash flow generation, which is tied mostly to Southwest Airlines' pricing strategy for inter-island flights. Moody's believes that the effects of the August 2023 fires on Maui and Hawaii will be temporary, rather than leading to a sustained decline in demand for travel to Hawaii. Credit metrics are weak but should strengthen as 2024 progresses. Debt/EBITDA could decline to about 7x and FFO + interest to interest could approach 3x.
Hawaiian has a record of solid operating performance and a relatively conservative financial policy, demonstrated by debt/EBITDA sustained below 2.6x between 2016 and 2019. Moody's believes Hawaiian would like to restore its historical balance sheet strength; however, the pace of restoration of operating cash flow to near 2019 levels will dictate the pace. The undrawn $235 million revolver and unencumbered assets that could bring in about $500 million of new debt also support the liquidity profile. Interest income earned on the company's cash is substantial, lowering annual interest expense by about half, to about $40 million in 2023 and 2024.
The Ba3 rating on the notes reflects the essentiality of the Hawaiian Airlines' brand and related intellectual property for it to operate its business and the importance of its loyalty program to its day-to-day operations and cash flows. This is balanced by relatively low recovery prospects if the collateral ever needed to be monetized to pay off the notes under an airline liquidation scenario. The notes rating is one notch above the rating Moody's would assign to other senior secured obligations based on its LGD waterfall. Moody's applies a one notch positive override of the LGD model rating to the loyalty program notes because it expects a lower loss given default compared to other of the company's senior secured debt obligations, which are unrated.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be downgraded if Moody's expects that operating cash flow will not materially increase or if Moody's expects a material reduction in the company's liquidity. No demonstrated improvement in debt/EBITDA towards 7x nor retained cash flow-to-debt approaching 8% through 2024 would also pressure the ratings. There will be no upwards pressure on the ratings until after a sustained material recovery of operating cash flow.  EBITDA margin approaching 15%, debt/EBITDA sustained below 5x and retained cash flow-to-debt approaching 13% while the company takes delivery of the 787s in upcoming years could support a ratings upgrade.
Changes in the EETC ratings can result from any combination of changes in the underlying credit quality or ratings of the company, Moody's opinion of the importance of the aircraft collateral to the company's operations and/or its estimates of current and projected aircraft market values, which will affect estimates of loan-to-value.
The principal methodology used in rating Hawaiian Holdings, Inc. and HawaiianMiles Loyalty, Ltd. was Passenger Airlines published in August 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74345. The principal methodologies used in rating Hawaiian Airlines, Inc. were Passenger Airlines published in August 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74345, and Enhanced Equipment Trust and Equipment Trust Certificates published in July 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/56462. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
Headquartered in Honolulu, Hawaii, Hawaiian Holdings, Inc. is the holding company parent of Hawaiian Airlines, Inc., Hawaii's biggest and longest-serving airline. Hawaiian offers nonstop service to Hawaii from 15 US gateway cities, and serves American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea and Tahiti. Hawaiian also provides approximately 150 jet flights daily between the Hawaiian Islands. The company reported revenue of $2.6 billion in 2022.
