Moody's affirms Abri Group Limited's A3 ratings in anticipation of its merger with Silva Homes Limited; outlook negative
London, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today affirmed Abri Group Limited's (Abri) baa1 Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) and A3 long-term issuer ratings, Radian Capital Plc's (Radian) A3 long-term senior secured debt ratings and Yarlington Treasury Services PLC's (Yarlington) A3 long-term senior secured debt rating, in anticipation of the merger of Abri and Silva Homes Limited (Silva) in October 2023. The negative outlooks on all entities are maintained.
Abri is expected to merge with Silva in October 2023. Silva and its associated entity will become subsidiaries of Abri when the merger completes.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Moody's affirmation of the ratings is based on the expectation that the credit strengths of the merged entity will reflect those currently exhibited by Abri as a standalone entity, including very strong liquidity and unencumbered asset base and debt metrics in line with peer medians. Similarly, the credit challenges of the merged entity will also be close to those already identified of Abri as a standalone entity, including deteriorated short-term operating margin, albeit set to increase, an elevated capital expenditure profile and rising market sales exposure. The affirmation reflects Moody's understanding that governance and management of the merged entity will be the same as the one of Abri as a standalone entity.
The ratings reflect the large size and strong balance sheet of the organisation as well as its projected strong liquidity. The merged entity will own and manage around 41,000 units (excluding leasehold units) across the south of England. The large size of the organisation will provide greater influence and will support a higher resilience to financial stresses compared to smaller housing associations. Abri's governance and management has a track record of successfully implementing mergers as it was formed out of the merger of Radian and Yarlington in 2019 and the affirmation reflects Moody's assumption the proposed merger will be effectively executed. Abri will benefit from a reinforced balance sheet, with significant housing assets, including unencumbered assets valued at £1.5 billion as of June 2023.
Silva and Abri currently hold high levels of liquidity and Moody's expects post-merger Abri will continue to follow Abri's strong liquidity rules. Abri's combined immediately-available liquidity is projected to be high at around 1.1x two-years' forward-looking cash needs at fiscal year end 2024. Abri's proposed liquidity policy would also be strong with an 18-month net cash requirement with 50% of sales income removed, higher than the regulator's requirement.
The merged entity plans to develop or acquire around 5,700 units from fiscal 2024 through fiscal 2028, representing roughly 12% of its existing stock, an ambitious target. Net capital expenditure will rise above rated peers averaging 49% of turnover over fiscals 2024-2026, which exposes the group to added risks given the weakened operating environment, especially inflationary pressures and labour and material shortages. Moody's notes this is a reduction compared to the sum of Abri and Silva's standalone development plans, as the merged entity decided to reduce its development programme in light of the sector-wide challenges, but it remains higher than peers. More than half of the programme will be affordable rent units, a third for shared ownership and outright market sales will make up the remaining 10%. As a result, market sales (including first tranche shared ownership) are projected to peak at 21% of turnover in fiscal 2025, a high level, and this exposes the group to the risk of a housing market downturn.
Debt will increase to support this development to £1.7 billion in fiscal 2026 from a combined £1.4 billion in fiscal 2023. However, Abri will benefit from increased grants as a result of its strategic partnership with Homes England, which will stabilise its gearing. Gearing is projected to average 48% over fiscals 2024-26, compared to 51% for rated peers. Debt could further increase should Abri fail to realise its planned fixed asset sales, which are an important source of funding for the development programme, an added risk.
Abri continues to be exposed to inflationary pressures, a credit negative. Abri's operating margin is projected to increase above 25% from fiscal 2024 due to the compound effect of a strong delivery of new units in fiscal 2023 by Abri standalone, with 1,017 new units delivered, as well as efficiencies achieved from the previous merger between Radian and Yarlington. This projected improvement could be limited by inflationary pressures, especially on repair and maintenance and utility bills, as well as risks of delays in development caused by labour and material shortages, or a lower rent increase than the one assumed.
Despite the projected increase in debt, interest covers will also improve, with social housing lettings interest coverage averaging around 1.3x over fiscals 2024-26, from 1.1x in fiscal 2023 for Abri as a standalone, driven by the increased profitability, although subject to the same risks as the operating margin.
As per the application of Moody's Joint Default Analysis for Government-Related Issuers, Abri's Baseline Credit Assessment is baa1. The A3 rating incorporates the one-notch uplift provided by Moody's assessment of a strong likelihood of extraordinary support from the Government of the United Kingdom (Aa3 negative).
Radian Capital Plc's and Yarlington Treasury Services PLC's A3 ratings and negative outlooks reflect Abri's A3 issuer rating and negative outlook.
RATIONALE FOR NEGATIVE OUTLOOK
The negative outlook reflects the high exposure to weaker economic and financial conditions in the UK. A 7% ceiling on social rent increases in England combined with high cost inflation and sizeable levels of mandatory expenses (quality, fire and building safety, decarbonisation) will weigh on operating margins over the next 12 to 18 months. This could be worsened by additional below-inflation caps on social rent increases. At the same time, higher interest rates and tightening financing conditions will further weaken interest coverage ratios. Further declines in home prices and sale volumes in the UK could affect housing associations' profitability and surpluses from market sales and further weaken their credit profile.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
Abri's credit impact score is neutral-to-low (CIS-2) reflecting its moderately negative exposure to environmental and social risks counterbalanced by its neutral-to-low exposure to governance risks, as well as a supportive regulatory framework and Moody's view of strong support for the sector from the UK government.
Risks stemming from carbon transition are moderate due to the legislative requirement for English housing associations to improve the energy efficiency of their existing housing stock by 2035, leading to increased expenditure. Moody's considers that Abri has a material exposure to this risk due to a significant proportion of its stock requiring retrofit.
Abri is highly exposed to responsible production risks with the legislative requirement to improve the safety of its existing housing stock which will increase expenditure over the medium term. Housing associations are exposed to demographic and societal trends risks, as the government controls rent setting in England and Wales. The government's recent intervention on social rent policy with a ceiling on social rent increases introduces policy volatility to the sector and will have a negative impact on financial performance.
Governance in the sector is generally fit for purpose, with good oversight of business risks, strong financial planning and risk management processes, and detailed reporting. The regulatory framework also supports good governance in the sector. Abri has a more complex structure than peers but this is mitigated by the group's strong management, illustrated in its G1/V1 regulatory judgement. Silva is also rated G1/V1 by the regulator and has a very simple group structure.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
A rating upgrade is unlikely due to the negative outlook. The outlook could be changed to stable if the UK government's outlook was stabilised and if Abri's metrics did not materially worsen. This includes gearing remaining below 50% and interest covers in line with peers.
Downward pressure on Abri's ratings could result from a failure to meet market sale and fixed asset sale targets or an increase in market sales exposure beyond business plan projections, social housing lettings interest coverage sustained below 1.2x or an increasing indebtedness beyond business plan projections. In addition, a weaker regulatory framework, a dilution of the overall level of support from the UK government, or a downgrade of the UK sovereign rating could exert downward pressure on the ratings.
The methodologies used in these ratings were European Social Housing Providers published in April 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64685, and Government-Related Issuers Methodology published in February 2020 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64864. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
