Moody's affirms Discover Financial's ratings (Baa2 long-term senior unsecured), changes outlook to negative from stable
New York, August 17, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has affirmed the ratings of Discover Financial Services (DFS) and its bank subsidiary, Discover Bank, following the affirmation of the baa1 baseline credit assessments (BCA) and adjusted baseline credit assessments of the bank subsidiary. DFS' Baa2 senior long-term unsecured debt rating and Ba1 (hyb) preferred stock non-cumulative rating were affirmed, as were the senior unsecured shelf rating of (P)Baa2 and preferred shelf non-cumulative rating of (P)Ba1. Also affirmed were Discover Bank's long-term senior unsecured debt rating of Baa1, the long-term Issuer Rating of Baa1, the subordinate debt rating of Baa1, the long-term A2 and short-term Prime-1 deposit ratings, the long-term A3(cr) and short-term Prime-2(cr) Counterparty Risk Assessments and the long-term Baa1 and short-term Prime-2 Counterparty Risk Ratings. Additionally, the instrument-level outlooks of DFS' senior unsecured debt as well as Discover Bank's long-term bank deposits, senior unsecured debt and long-term issuer rating were revised to negative from stable.
The outlooks on DFS and Discover Bank were revised to negative from stable reflecting Moody's assessment that the company's credit profile has weakened, following recent disclosures relating to the bank overcharging merchants for many years on certain credit card transactions and that the bank had reached a proposed consent order with the FDIC with regards to its compliance management system. In addition, several long-tenured senior executives have recently departed the company, including the company's CEO and president, Roger Hochschild, leaving almost all the senior leadership relatively new to the company. The negative outlook reflects Moody's view that these recent developments reveal increased governance risks.  
RATINGS RATIONALE
The rating affirmations reflect DFS' strong market position which drives its very strong profitability, one of the highest amongst Moody's-rated US banks with a return on assets (ROAA) averaging well above 2.0% since 2011. The company's strong profitability also provides additional support to the firm's solid capital levels.
The change in outlook to negative was driven by governance challenges that the bank is facing with respect to the company's operational risks and internal controls. Last month, the company reported that it had incorrectly charged merchants on certain credit card transactions dating back to mid-2007, as well as that the bank had reached a proposed consent order with the FDIC in connection with deficiencies in the bank's compliance management system. In addition, the bank continues to operate under a consent agreement with the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) that began in 2015 with respect to various issues in servicing student loans.
While the cumulative amount of the incorrect merchant billing was quite modest at around $365 million in comparison to 2022 net income of $5.7 billion, the ultimate financial impact to the company is uncertain. The company may face costs from potential reputational damage as well as from regulatory restrictions, fines and penalties. In addition, the ultimate cost to remediate the corporate governance, compliance and risk management deficiencies is unknown. Furthermore, we view the recent senior management departures as credit negative developments, leaving almost all the senior leadership relatively new to the company.
DFS' asset quality is currently solid. As of 30 June 2023, delinquencies were 2.6%, modestly higher than 2.2% for the same period in 2019, and net charge-offs were 3.2% annualized in Q2 2022, the same as in Q2 2019. Along with other credit card lenders, Moody's expects DFS' delinquencies and net charge-offs to continue to increase. Assuming the US unemployment rate peaks at around 5% under our baseline scenario, we anticipate that the bank's net charge-offs would peak around 4.5% to 5.0% in 2024.
Absent a material change in the market dynamics of the credit card market, such as regulatory changes or the entry of strong, well-capitalized new competitors, Moody's believes that a severe economic downturn would only temporarily negatively affect the bank's prime-revolver-focused credit card business. However, if the realized change in the bank's credit card net charge-offs were to prove substantially worse than anticipated for more adverse changes in the unemployment rate, this could suggest weak credit underwriting or a novel feature in the macro environment relative to prior economic downturns. Such a development could put downward pressure on DFS' ratings.
The Current Expected Credit Losses (CECL) accounting standard that the company adopted on 1 January 2020 had a far greater impact on credit card lenders, such as DFS, than regional bank peers that have more diversified loan books. DFS' loan loss reserves increased 2.6% versus around 0.3% for regional bank peers. Following CECL adoption, the bank has modestly reduced its capital targets by an amount that is lower than the increase in reserves. The company's target common equity tier 1 (CET1) to risk-weighted assets (RWA) ratio is 10.5%, and that target along with the bank's tangible common equity to risk weighted assets ratio are factored into the company's ratings.
DFS has an above peer-average reliance on confidence-sensitive wholesale funding. However, over the last several years, the company's funding risk has declined as it has materially reduced its reliance on wholesale funding as evidenced by a decline in the ratio of market funds to tangible banking assets from 24% as of end-2018 to below 15% as of 30 June 2023. Moody's expects that the company will continue to grow its deposit franchise to largely finance future loan growth with its market funds ratio remaining around 15%.
Reflecting Moody's views on the aforementioned increased governance challenges, Moody's changed DFS's governance issuer profile score to G-3 from G-2 and DFS's ESG credit impact score to CIS-3 from CIS-2 to reflect the limited impact on the current rating, with greater potential for future negative impact over time.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Given the negative outlook, an upgrade of DFS' ratings is unlikely over the next 12-18 months. The outlook could return to stable if Moody's assesses that the increased governance risks and credit negative impact of the recent operational failures and management departures are modest. Over the longer term, the baa1 BCA of DFS' bank subsidiary could be upgraded if the bank materially increased the share of net income it derived from non-credit card businesses, while also maintaining its historically strong profitability and solid capital levels which provide the bank with a material cushion to economic downturns. Reduced reliance on its credit card business would reduce the risk to the bank of a more than short-lived disruption such as from increased competition or regulatory changes. Additional credit positive changes would be a further strengthening of its funding profile, such as by reducing its reliance on wholesale funding such that its market funds ratio decreased and was expected to remain below 12.5% or by continuing to strengthen its direct deposit franchise such as by increasing the share of deposits from checking accounts. A higher BCA would likely lead to ratings upgrades.
The baa1 BCA of DFS' bank subsidiary could be lowered if additional material regulatory and corporate governance issues come to light or if the bank's operating challenges and management turnover weaken the bank's credit profile, such as negatively impacting profitability or the bank's funding structure. For example, ROAA falling below and expected to remain below 2.0% or its market funds ratio increasing and expected to remain above 17.5%. In addition, the BCA could be lowered if capitalization or asset performance weakens materially, reducing the firm's resilience to shocks. For example, if the bank's TCE to RWA ratio fell below and was expected to remain below 9.5% or if credit card charge-offs were substantially above the unemployment rate for a meaningful period. Additional credit negative developments would include a material change in the market dynamics of the credit card market, for example because of regulatory changes or the entry of strong, well-capitalized new competitors. A lower BCA would likely lead to ratings downgrades.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
