Moody's places Imagine School at Land O'Lakes (FL) rating under review for downgrade
New York, August 30, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has placed Imagine School at Land O'Lakes (FL) Ba1 revenue bond rating under review for downgrade. The action affects approximately $17 million in rated debt. The outlook has been updated to rating under review from stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE / FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
The review for downgrade is prompted by the potential addition of $30 million in debt as the school issues parity debt for a new school in West Pasco (Imagine School at West Pasco). In addition to the increased debt there will be construction and ramp up risk as the organization acquires the land, constructs and furnishes facilities, hires staff and builds enrollment for an opening for academic year 2024-25.  Likewise, the school's operating performance has weakened and liquidity has failed to increase in accordance with previously articulated projections.  Together the challenges the school faces relative to the debt issuance and weakened operating position may have a longer term significant negative impact on the schools credit profile.
Additionally, the schools history of weak disclosure practices including the project scale, the increased debt and risk levels to current bonds holders is a contributing factor and results in deterioration of our assessment of the school's overall financial policy and strategy, a governance consideration under Moody's ESG framework.
The review will focus on a more detailed assessment of the new bond issue terms, construction and ramp up risk, recent financial results, and updated forecasts for enrollment, operations, liquidity, leverage and governance. The review outcome could include a downgrade by one or more rating notches.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Substantively improved liquidity
-     Reduced leverage
-     Stronger debt service coverage
-     Improved disclosure
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO  A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Deterioration of coverage or liquidity
-     Material increase in leverage
-     Failure to achieve projected enrollment growth
-     Continued failures to disclose operating and financial results inline with disclosure agreement
LEGAL SECURITY
Debt service will be paid from loan payments pursuant to a Loan Agreement between Imagine-Pasco,LLC. as the Borrower and Capital Trust Agency. There is no lockbox mechanism. School revenues primarily consist of state payments under the Florida Education Finance Program (FEFP) on a weighted per pupil basis. Both state and federal revenues flow monthly from the state to Pasco County School District (Aa3). The district may then deduct 2% of revenues for the first 250 students for administrative fees, based upon its high academic performance and must pass all remaining revenues to the charter school within 10 working days. Monthly payments are paid in relatively even amounts during the fiscal year, providing greater certainty around cash flow coverage.
Under the Loan Agreement, the Trustee is granted a security interest in all of the right, title, and interest to the pledged revenues as security for the payment of the bonds. In addition to pledged revenues, debt is secured by a mortgage at the facilities acquired with proceeds of the bonds creating a lien on the facilities, and is assigned by the issuer to the Trustee.
Bond covenants include a debt service reserve sized at the lesser of a three-pronged test; a minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.1:1; an additional bonds test is based on a 1.25 historical (not including proposed debt) and 1.25 forecasted including proposed; and a weak days' cash on hand requirement of greater than 45 days. If the school fails to meet the debt service covenant requirement, it must hire an independent consultant to make recommendations to remedy the coverage shortfall. If the days' cash on hand covenant is less than 45 days' for two consecutive testing dates, the failure will constitute an event of default, and the borrower will promptly employ an independent management consultant for recommendations. A failure to pay principal or interest will constitute an event of default, whereby the full principal amount outstanding will become immediately due and payable. Any other event of default, including a default on the loan agreement, will require majority bondholder approval to accelerate. Extraordinary redemption provisions are normal and include the school ceasing to exist as a charter school or the bonds being declared taxable.
PROFILE
The school is a K-8 Charter School in Pasco County (Aa2). The K-8 enrollment for the 2023-24 academic year totaled 907 students. The school has a current wait list of over 455 students.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was US Charter Schools published in September 2016 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64397. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
