Moody's confirms B3 rating on Limak Iskenderun's senior secured notes, negative outlook
London, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today confirmed the B3 rating on the senior secured notes issued by Limak Iskenderun Uluslararasi Liman Isletmeciligi A.S. (LimakPort), the concessionaire for the port of Iskenderun located in the south-east of Turkiye. The outlook is negative. This rating action concludes the review for downgrade initiated on 13 February 2023.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Today's rating action recognises the ongoing progress by LimakPort in restoring the port's damaged infrastructure and a partial resumption of operations following the massive earthquakes that hit southeast Turkiye on 6 February 2023. It also takes account of the insurance payments received to date, which are supportive of the company's liquidity. The rating confirmation further reflects Moody's expectation that (1) LimakPort will be able to complete the restoration works as planned by the end of this year; and (2) further insurance proceeds and cash flow from operations, combined with the potential support from Limak, as the major shareholder, will be sufficient to allow LimakPort to continue to service its debt and comply with the terms of its debt documentation.
LimakPort was severely affected by the devastating earthquakes and the subsequent fire at the port. The port's operations were suspended as the infrastructure was damaged and the region grappled with the consequences of the earthquakes, which claimed thousands of lives and damaged or destroyed essential infrastructure and facilities. LimakPort was, however, able to resume partial operations already in April and earlier than planned. As of today, the port operates berth 2 and a section of berths 3 and 4, which allowed it to handle more than 35 thousand twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) of containers in July. This compares with 44 thousand TEUs that the port handled in January this year. The company's operating plans assume that additional container capacity will be released in October and that, by the end of this year, the port will be able to handle some 750-800 thousand TEUs annually, which is well above container throughput reported before the earthquakes.
Restoration of the port's capacity is subject to the successful completion of construction works that include additional piling, reinforcement of concrete beams and restoration of the breakwater wall. Moody's notes that the scope of the repair works and their cost have been significantly revised upwards since the initial inspection of damage at the port. The current estimate of the cost of around USD60 million compares with USD25 million estimated in March. There continue to be execution risks, in Moody's view, including around the schedule and repair costs, but also increased visibility and the company appears to be making good progress in managing the repair works and restoring the port's infrastructure.
LimakPort expects the cost of restoration works to be covered by insurance payments. The company's overall insurance coverage (including an 18-month long indemnity period for business interruption) is around USD324.5 million. In June and July, the company received USD18 million in insurance payments for property damage. A further USD2 million has been already approved and is pending disbursement by the insurance companies. Management expects to receive further insurance payments of around USD27 million, of which USD15 million related to property damage and USD12 million related to business interruption, later this year. The company's plans assume that LimakPort will receive an additional USD32 million in insurance proceeds in 2024. There is, however, uncertainty around the timing of the receipt of those payments and their amounts.
Insurance proceeds are critical to LimakPort's liquidity in the next few months, given the cost of repair works and the company's debt service obligations. Moody's understands that the company's cash balance stood at USD42.9 million as of end-July 2023. Some USD19.8 million of this amount was in the debt service reserve account, which is sufficient to cover LimakPort's scheduled interest and principal debt payments in October 2023 and January 2024. Nevertheless, the company's operating cash flows will be insufficient to cover the construction works and to pre-fund the reserve accounts as required under the terms of the debt documentation. In this regard, Moody's understands that in the event of a delay in the insurance payments, Limak could provide support, including through the provision of the letters of credit, that would allow LimakPort to continue to comply with its debt documentation until at least the early part of next year.
LimakPort's credit quality is further dependent on the port's ability to increase its container throughput. The port's service area includes main industrial centres in the southeast of Turkiye. While the region was severely affected by the earthquakes, many of the businesses, including in the Gaziantep industrial area, are operational and demand for the port's services is strong. This partly reflects the congestion at other ports and the competitive position of the port of Iskenderun in its catchment area.
Overall, the B3 rating assumes that the company will restore operations with the benefit of insurance proceeds, broadly in line with management expectations. The rating also factors in (1) the port's position as an important gateway for Turkish international trade, with a historically balanced mix of imports and exports; (2) the port's size and competitive dynamics in the region, including from Mersin port and Assan port; (3) the significant element of revenue supported by demand in overseas markets, with most revenue collected in US dollar; (4) the high financial leverage and the terms of the senior secured notes; and (5) the company's exposure to Turkiye's political, fiscal and regulatory environment.
RATIONALE FOR THE NEGATIVE OUTLOOK
The negative outlook takes account of (1) the ongoing execution risks associated with the company's plans to restore the port's infrastructure and limited visibility over LimakPort's operating cash flows; and (2) uncertainty around the insurance proceeds and their timing. As the company's liquidity is dependent on the receipt of further insurance proceeds, the resolution of the negative outlook could happen in a relatively short timeframe.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
Given the negative outlook, an upgrade of the rating is not anticipated. The outlook could be changed to stable if LimakPort receives further insurance payments which, together with cash flow from operations, will provide it with a comfortable coverage of its debt service obligations.
LimakPort's rating could be downgraded if (1) there were delays to the receipt of further insurance payments or the amounts appeared likely to fall materially short of management's expectations, with a direct impact on the company's liquidity; (2) the company was unable to complete its restoration works as planned; (3) it appeared likely that future operating cash flows will not be sufficient to support the company's payment obligations. An increased risk of default, as a result of these factors, could be reflected in a downgrade of more than one notch, given the potential for limited recovery prospects. In addition, a downgrade of Turkiye's sovereign rating could put a downward pressure on LimakPort's rating.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Privately Managed Ports published in April 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/401274. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
LimakPort is the concessionaire for the port of Iskenderun. The company was granted a 36-year concession for the operation, maintenance and development of the port in 2011. In 2022, its revenue amounted to USD81 million. LimakPort is 80% owned by the Limak Group, a Turkish conglomerate. The remaining 20% is held by InfraMed.
