Moody's revises Yuexiu REIT's outlooks to negative from stable, affirms ratings
Hong Kong, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has revised the outlooks of Yuexiu Real Estate Investment Trust (Yuexiu REIT) and Yuexiu REIT MTN Company Limited to negative from stable.
At the same time, Moody's has affirmed the Ba1 corporate family rating (CFR) of Yuexiu REIT and the provisional (P)Ba1 backed senior unsecured rating on Yuexiu REIT MTN Company Limited's backed medium-term note (MTN) program, and Ba1 backed senior unsecured rating on the backed notes issued under the MTN program.
"The negative outlook reflects increased uncertainties over Yuexiu REIT's ability to strengthen its operations and credit metrics to levels commensurate with its current Ba1 CFR amid challenging business conditions in China (A1 stable)," says Alfred Hui, a Moody's Analyst.
"The rating affirmation reflects Yuexiu REIT's maintenance of quality assets in major cities that could support the REIT to gradually recover its operations and credit metrics from the currently weak levels. Additionally, we expect the REIT to maintain its good access to funding to address refinancing needs at a reasonable cost," adds Hui.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Yuexiu REIT's Ba1 CFR reflects the trust's portfolio of good-quality assets in key tier 1 and tier 2 cities in China, including Guangzhou, the capital city of the economically strong Guangdong province; Shanghai; Wuhan; and Hangzhou. The Ba1 rating also reflects Yuexiu REIT's good funding access given its close linkage to a state-owned sponsor. Guangzhou Yue Xiu Holdings Limited, which is owned by the Guangzhou municipal government, is the ultimate controlling unit holder of Yuexiu REIT.  However, these strengths are offset by the REIT's weak credit metrics and geographic concentration in Guangzhou, China.
Moody's expects Yuexiu REIT's revenue and EBITDA recovery over the next 12-18 months to be slower than the agency previously expected, as uncertainties over China's economic recovery will likely weigh on business and consumer sentiment. This in turn will dampen the occupancy rate and delay positive rental reversion of Yuexiu REIT's properties. As of end of June 2023, Yuexiu REIT's overall occupancy rate fell to 84.0% from 85.5% as of end of 2022 and 88.8% as of end of June 2022, mainly driven by lower occupancy rates in the office buildings.
In the absence of asset disposals and other debt reduction plans, Moody's forecasts Yuexiu REIT's debt leverage, as measured by net debt/EBITDA, will remain high at 13.2x-13.7x over the next 12-18 months, although lower than 15.6x for the twelve months ended June 2023. Similarly, Yuexiu REIT's interest servicing ability, as measured by EBITDA interest coverage, will remain weak at 1.7x-2.0x over the next 12-18 months, versus 1.6x for the twelve months ended June 2023.  Moody's considers these projected credit metrics to be weak for its Ba1 CFR, despite their recovery trajectory.
In addition, Yuexiu REIT has a high exposure to offshore borrowing, which will expose the REIT to elevated interest rates in offshore markets. As of the end of June 2023, unhedged non-RMB floating-rate borrowings accounted for 51% of Yuexiu REIT's total reported debt. Moody's notes that Yuexiu REIT has been replacing its offshore debt with RMB-denominated borrowing to reduce its exposure. In the first half (1H) of 2023, Yuexiu REIT obtained a RMB4 billion 3-year secured bank loan facility at 3.2% and issued a RMB1.5 billion 3-year bond at 4.15% for refinancing.
Moody's also expects that Yuexiu REIT could use more secured funding to lower interest costs. However, an increased use of secured borrowing will reduce Yuexiu REIT's financial flexibility and increase the legal and structural risks of senior unsecured creditors. As of end of June 2023, secured debt accounted for 12% of Yuexiu REIT's reported debt, up from 6% as of the end of 2022.
The fact that the trust has to pay out most of its distributable income as dividends limits its ability to achieve a strong cash buffer on its balance sheet. Moreover, Yuexiu REIT will need to have continued access to funding to address refinancing needs. Although the trust has refinanced most of the maturing debt coming due in 2H 2023, the trust's cash balance of RMB2.8 billion as of the end of June 2023, together with its undrawn bank loan facility and operating cash flow, is not sufficient to cover all of its maturing debt and dividend payments over the next 12-18 months. The risk associated with its weak liquidity is mitigated by Yuexiu REIT's good track record of refinancing maturing debt over the past few years and strong banking relationships, considering its government-owned background.
In terms of environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors, Moody's has considered Yuexiu REIT's financial policy that favors debt-funded acquisitions to support its growth over the past few years, as reflected by its high debt leverage. Moody's also considers Yuexiu REIT's concentrated ownership and related party transactions with its state-owned sponsor, as well as the regulatory oversight provided by the Securities and Futures Commission of Hong Kong SAR, China.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Given the negative outlook, an upgrade of Yuexiu REIT's ratings is unlikely.
However, Moody's could revise Yuexiu REIT's outlooks to stable if it (1) achieves high occupancy levels and profitability for its portfolio of assets, (2) improves its credit metrics and (3) maintains good access to funding with low borrowing costs.
The rating outlooks could return to stable if Yuexiu REIT improves its debt leverage, such that adjusted net debt/EBITDA trends towards 12x and EBITDA/interest coverage rises above 2.0x.
On the other hand, Moody's could downgrade the ratings if (1) Yuexiu REIT's operating and financial performances do not recover as the agency expected; (2) the trust is unable to reduce its debt leverage or conducts debt-funded business expansion, or (3) its access to funding weakens. A reduction in financial flexibility because of significantly higher secured debt would also pressure the ratings.
Credit metrics that could lead to a rating downgrade include net debt/EBITDA staying above 12.5x-13.0x, or EBITDA/interest coverage falling below 2.0x, both on a sustained basis.
Moody's could also downgrade the senior unsecured ratings if Yuexiu REIT substantially increases secured borrowing to refinance unsecured offshore debt, and significantly weakens the recovery rates of senior unsecured creditors.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was REITs and Other Commercial Real Estate Firms published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393395. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Yuexiu Real Estate Investment Trust (Yuexiu REIT) is the first Hong Kong-listed REIT with a property portfolio located entirely in China (A1 stable). Yuexiu REIT is also the first Hong Kong-listed REIT sponsored by a Chinese property developer.
As of the end of June 2023, the trust's portfolio comprised ten properties, with six located in Guangzhou, one in Shanghai, one in Wuhan, one in Hangzhou and one in Hong Kong SAR, China. These properties include a wholesale mall, Grade A offices, retail malls, a premium international five-star hotel and a service apartment.
