Moody's affirms Johnson/Miami Counties USD 230 (Spring Hill), KS's A1 GO and issuer ratings; removes negative outlook
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed Johnson/Miami Counties Unified School District 230 (Spring Hill), KS's A1 general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) and issuer ratings at A1. The negative outlook has been removed. At the end of fiscal 2022, the district had approximately $221.1 million debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The affirmation of the A1 issuer rating reflects the district's improved financial performance that is expected to be maintained, above average economic metrics, and a strong enrollment growth trend. The rating also reflects the district's elevated long-term liabilities when compared to similarly rated peers, which is made up entirely of debt, but will remain manageable with no near-term issuance plans. Finally, the rating considers the district's weak financial reporting, as the cash-based audit does not comply with US accounting principles and does not disclose a modified accrual-based fund balance, other post-employment liabilities, capital asset values, or depreciation.
The A1 GOULT rating is equivalent to the A1 issuer rating based on the district's general obligation full faith and credit pledge as well as an unlimited property tax dedicated to debt service.
RATING OUTLOOK
The previous negative outlook was removed primarily due to the improvement in finances. Moody's does not typically assign outlooks to local government issuers with this amount of debt outstanding.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Significant improvement in operating reserves
-     Moderation of long-term liabilities
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Inability to maintain operating reserves relative to operating revenue
-     Further increase in long-term liabilities through additional borrowing absent corresponding revenue growth
-     Significant decline of income and wealth metrics
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's general obligation bonds are backed by an irrevocable pledge of the district's full faith, credit and resources and are payable from ad valorem taxes to be levied, without limitation as to rate or amount, against all taxable property within the district.
PROFILE
The district is located in the City of Spring Hill, Kansas which is approximately 30 miles south of downtown Kansas City, Missouri (Aa3 stable) and five miles south of Olathe, Kansas (Aa1). The district encompasses approximately 71 square miles and has a current enrollment of over 5,400 students.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
