Moody's affirms Eletrobras' Ba2 CFR and downgrades BCA to ba3; outlook remains stable
New York, September 01, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) affirmed Centrais Eletricas Brasileiras SA-Eletrobras' (Eletrobras) corporate family rating (CFR) at Ba2. Simultaneously, Moody's downgraded Eletrobras baseline credit assessment (BCA) to ba3 from ba2. The outlook remains stable.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Centrais Eletricas Brasileiras SA-Eletrobras
.... Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed Ba2
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Centrais Eletricas Brasileiras SA-Eletrobras
.... Baseline Credit Assessment, Downgraded to ba3 from ba2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Centrais Eletricas Brasileiras SA-Eletrobras
....Outlook, Remains Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The decision to downgrade Eletrobras' BCA to ba3, was primarily based on Moody's updated view on the company's prospective capital structure and future cash flows, amid lower than anticipated market-based power prices in Brazil and growing investment plans that will limit the pace of leverage reduction. The Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) represents Moody's opinion of the company's standalone credit quality. It takes into consideration the company's dominant position in the local market and its strong business profile following the renewal of hydropower concessions and the growing share of transmission revenues, which add predictability to the company's cash flows. It also incorporates its adequate liquidity position and long debt amortization profile.
Following the equity offering in June 2022, the company's leverage increased due to the consolidation of BRL20 billion in debt from Santo Antonio power plant through Eletrobras' subsidiary Furnas Centrais Eletricas S.A. and the recognition of about BRL40 billion in long-term concession liabilities, mainly the Energy Development Account (CDE) and the Sao Francisco river basin revitalization. Higher leverage would be compensated over time with the re-contracting of power generation capacity at substantially higher energy prices; however the current market conditions now indicate power prices 47% lower than what we initially anticipated. As a result, Eletrobras' lower coverage ratio and higher indebtedness will likely take longer to revert.
For the twelve months ended June 2023, Eletrobras' consolidated leverage, as measured by the cash flow from operations pre-working capital (CFO pre-WC) to net debt ratio and incorporating Moody's adjustments, reached 12.6%, down from 15.5% in the three-year average between 2020 and 2022. At the same time, the cash interest coverage has deteriorated to 2.0x from 2.6x. Moody's updated projections consider the CFO pre-WC to net debt around 10% through 2026, with interest coverage ranging from 2.0x to 2.3x. Previously, the rating case incorporated leverage staying around 17.5% and interest coverage at 2.6x.
The ratings base case incorporates continuity in Eletrobras' strategic business plan, along with enhanced controls and other initiatives to support operating efficiency gains, leading to a recurring EBITDA around BRL17-20 billion per year in the projected period. It also considers the company maintaining a disciplined approach towards investments and dividends while pursuing other growth opportunities in the local market. The company's current budget already comprises BRL17 billion to be invested through 2027, on greenfield power and transmission projects and upgrades of existing facilities.
As a government-related issuer, Eletrobras' Ba2 corporate family rating takes into consideration the application of Moody's Joint Default Analysis. This framework incorporates assumptions of high interdependence with the Government of Brazil (Ba2 stable), the controlling shareholder, and a moderate level of support. Following the capitalization in 2022, shareholders' voting power was limited to 10% as to maintain the company's status as a true corporation. Despite a decrease in influence on the board, the Brazilian government maintains its position as the largest individual shareholder, holding a 42.9% ownership interest in the company's total share capital. The affirmation of the Ba2 CFR considers Moody's view that the federal government will continue to provide support to the company if needed, given its significance as the primary electric company in Brazil, responsible for 22% of the country's generation capacity and 38% of the installed transmission lines.
The stable outlook on Eletrobras' ratings follows the stable outlook on the Government of Brazil's Ba2 rating. It also incorporates our view that the company's stand-alone credit profile will be maintained over the next 12 to 18 months, reflecting adequate liquidity and adequate debt maturity profile.
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
Eletrobras' CIS-3 considers a limited impact of ESG considerations on the current rating, with potential for future negative impact over time. This scores encompasses Moody's view on the company's current exposure to ESG risks and several management practices in place, which are integrated within its business strategy to mitigate potential risks in the future.
Moody's assigns Eletrobras an E-3 rating primarily due to its exposure to physical climate risks, particularly in relation to extreme weather patterns. The company's minority stake on nuclear power plants also contributes to some exposure to waste and pollution risks. However, these risks are offset by a positive carbon transition exposure, as the company has minimal fossil fuel-fired generation.
Social risk exposure S-3 reflects its susceptibility to social risk, which arises from the demographic and societal patterns that heighten public apprehension regarding affordability matters. This exposure may result in unfavorable regulatory political intervention, aligning with the prevailing conditions observed among other utilities in the Latin America region. These potential risks are counterbalanced by a modest level of vulnerability in areas such as health and safety, human resources, customer relations, and sustainable production.
The G-3 governance score is primarily influenced by the company's current financial strategy and risk management, as well as its board structure, policies, and procedures. Additionally, it considers a assessment of adequate management credibility and track record.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
An upgrade of Eletrobras' Ba2 rating would depend on a similar action on Moody's ratings on the government of Brazil. Quantitatively, positive rating pressure on the standalone credit profile would materialize if the CFO pre-WC to total net debt ratio stays above 20%, and the interest coverage ratio approaches 4.2x on sustained basis. A rating upgrade would also depend on the company maintaining an adequate liquidity profile.
Negative rating pressure would increase if the company's financial policy shifts ecompassing higher risk for creditors, such as excessive dividend distributions, or signs of negative government or regulatory interference. From a quantitative standpoint, a rating downgrade will be considered if the CFO pre-WC to total net debt ratio falls consistently below 10% and the interest coverage ratio remains below 2.8x.
Headquartered in Rio de Janeiro, Centrais Eletricas Brasileiras SA-Eletrobras is a holding company in which federal government has a 42.9% stake in the overall share capital. Eletrobras is the country's largest energy company with a total installed capacity of 43 gigawatts (GW), equivalent to 22% of Brazil's total power generation segment and interests on a total of 73,736 kilometers (km) high voltage transmission lines, equivalent to 38% of the country's electricity network. Investments are held under separate subsidiaries, being Furnas, Chesf and Eletronorte the largest ones. In the last twelve months ended June 30, 2023, the company's net revenues reached BRL35.5 billion, according to Moody's standard adjustments, of which 59% derived from the generation business and 40% from the transmission segment.
The methodologies used in these ratings were Unregulated Utilities and Unregulated Power Companies published in May 2017 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/75129, and Government-Related Issuers Methodology published in February 2020 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64864. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
