Moody's affirms West Contra Costa USD, CA's GOULT bonds at A1; revises outlook to stable from negative
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed the West Contra Costa Unified School District, CA's A2 issuer rating and changed the outlook to stable from negative. Concurrently, Moody's has affirmed the outstanding A1 general obligation (GOULT) and A3 lease ratings. The district has approximately $1.02 billion in outstanding general obligation (GOULT) bonds and about $3.2 million in outstanding certificates of participation (COPs).
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A2 issuer rating considers the district's favorable location within the diverse and large Bay area economy that will continue to see growth; supporting improvement in the district's solid resident income and full value per capita levels. The district's enrollment has been declining for several years with declines exacerbated during the pandemic. Contributing factors include families moving out of the area due to the high cost of living, declining birth rates and charter school competition. District management expects that enrollment declines will moderate with less competition from charter schools as existing schools are almost at capacity and with the implementation of the universal transitional  kindergarten program. Despite its enrollment losses, the increases in state funding and one time pandemic funds have contributed to the district's favorable results in fiscal 2022. This support is expected to continue in fiscal 2023 with projections showing the district ending with a surplus but with continued budget gaps that are expected to reduce reserve levels in fiscal 2024 to fiscal 2026. In order to address its ongoing structural imbalance, the district has approved a fiscal solvency plan, which once implemented will help keep finances at satisfactory levels. The rating also considers the district's elevated long-term liabilities and fixed costs.
The A1 rating assigned to the district's general obligation bonds is one notch higher than the A2 issuer rating. The one notch distinction reflects California school district GO bond security features that include the physical separation through a "lockbox" for pledged property tax collections and a security interest created by statute.
The district's A3 COP rating is one notch lower than the district's A2 issuer rating. For a California school district, Moody's typically applies a one-notch distinction between an issuer rating and the rating on lease-backed debt secured by a "more essential" asset. The one-notch distinction reflects the weaker legal structure of a standard abatement lease, despite the more essential nature of the asset.
RATING OUTLOOK
The revision to a stable outlook from negative reflects our expectation that the district's board will take necessary steps to implement the fiscal solvency plan to address its structural imbalance. Additionally, we expect the appointed fiscal advisor from the Contra Costa County Office of Education to provide strong fiscal oversight and support a return to balanced operations, which will be a key point in future reviews.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Stable or positive enrollment trends
-     Significant and sustained increases in reserves and liquidity while maintaining structurally balanced operations
-     Material reduction in leverage and fixed costs
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Failure to implement the fiscal solvency plan to address structural imbalance
-     Trend of more pronounced enrollment declines beyond current expectations that are not met with commensurate expense reductions
-     Material increases in leverage and/or fixed costs
LEGAL SECURITY
The general obligation bonds are secured by an unlimited property tax pledge of all taxable property within the district boundaries. The portion of the district's ad valorem property tax levy restricted for debt service is collected, held and transferred directly to the paying agent by Contra Costa County (Aa1 stable) on behalf of the district.
The district's bonds are covered under Contra Costa County's Teeter program, whereby the district will receive its full property tax levy, including that for debt service, with the county covering any short falls due to delinquencies. The county levies its debt service property tax based on a 15 month period annually, allowing it to build up a reserve to smooth out any required tax rate changes.
The leases are standard California abatement leases for essential property, namely the Lavonya DeJean Middle School in Richmond.
USE OF PROCEEDS
N/A
PROFILE
The West Contra Costa Unified School District is located in the western portion of Contra Costa County (Aa1 stable) about 15 miles northeast of the City of San Francisco (Aaa negative). The district serves residents in the cities of El Cerrito, Pinole , Richmond, San Pablo and the unincorporated communities of El Sobrante , Kensington, North Richmond and some other unincorporated areas in the county. The district currently maintains 33 elementary schools, five K-8 schools, six middle/junior high schools, seven high schools and five alternative/continuation programs, one special education pre-school, seven adult education sites, nine operation sites and 17 State-funded preschools. The district's enrollment is about 25,737 as of fiscal 2023.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
