Moody's downgrades Gemdale's and Famous' ratings, places them on review for further downgrade
Hong Kong, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has downgraded the corporate family rating (CFR) of Gemdale Corporation to Ba3 from Ba2 and the CFR of Famous Commercial Limited, Gemdale's wholly-owned subsidiary, to B1 from Ba3.
Moody's has also downgraded the senior unsecured rating on the bonds to B1 from Ba3 and the senior unsecured rating to (P)B1 from (P)Ba3 on the medium-term note (MTN) program issued by Gemdale Ever Prosperity Investment Limited (Gemdale Ever Prosperity) and guaranteed by Famous. Gemdale Ever Prosperity's offshore bonds are supported by Gemdale through keepwell deeds and deeds of equity interest purchase undertaking.
At the same time, Moody's has put the ratings on review for further downgrade. Previously, the outlook was negative.
"The downgrade of Gemdale's ratings reflects our expectation that the company's liquidity buffer and credit metrics will worsen amid weakening contracted sales and its still-constrained funding access to debt capital markets," says Kelly Chen, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Analyst.
"The review for downgrade reflects high uncertainty over the company's ability to improve its funding access and operations, which could increase the company's refinancing pressure given its sizable amount of debt maturities over the next 6-12 months," adds Chen.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Moody's expects Gemdale's operating performance to weaken over the next 12-18 months amid rising uncertainty over the recovery prospects of China's property market. Recent credit distress of certain Chinese developers could further dampen homebuyers' confidence over the sector, which could in turn pressure Gemdale's sales and cash flow over the next 6-12 months.
Specifically, Moody's estimates Gemdale's contracted sales will decline to RMB160 billion – RMB170 billion in 2023 and 2024, from RMB210 billion in 2022. In the first seven months of 2023, the company's contracted sales fell 19% from last year's, weaker than the national sales of 0.7% annual growth during the same period.
Gemdale's governance risk exposure is reflected in its weakened liquidity and risk management. The company has a large amount of bonds due or becoming puttable through the end of 2024. However, the company's slow progress in raising new funds will expose it to high refinancing uncertainty given the volatile funding environment.
Although Gemdale has not issued any bonds in the year to date, Moody's notes that it has issued long-term bank loans by securing its investment properties to address part of its refinancing needs over the past 6-12 months.
While Moody's expects Gemdale's liquidity to remain adequate, its liquidity buffer will reduce over the next 12-18 months if it is unable to regain access to capital market funding and continues to use its internal resources to repay its maturing bonds.  Moody's estimates the company had unrestricted cash of RMB42 billion as of the end of March 2023, which together with projected operating cash flow, will be sufficient to cover its maturing debt, including around RMB26 billion of onshore and offshore bonds becoming mature or puttable before the end of 2024.
In addition, Moody's projects Gemdale's credit metrics will deteriorate over the next 12-18 months, as weakening operations will further pressure the company's revenue recognition and its operating cash flow over the next 12-18 months. The company would also have to offer discounts to accelerate sales, lowering the profit margins for its property development businesses.
As a result, the company's adjusted debt/EBITDA would weaken to around 6.5x over the next 12-18 months from 5.0x in 2022 and its EBIT/interest coverage would drop to 2.7x from 3.7x over the same period. These credit metrics no longer support the company's previous Ba2 rating.
Gemdale's CFR continues to reflect its established brand name and long operating track record in China's property market, against its declining contracted sales and financial metrics; and significant exposure to its joint venture (JV) projects, which lowers the transparency of its credit metrics.
Meanwhile, the downgrade of Famous' CFR reflects Gemdale's weakened ability to provide financial support to Famous in times of stress.
Moody's support assumption considers (1) Gemdale's full ownership of Famous; (2) Famous' status as Gemdale's primary platform to raise funds from offshore debt capital markets; and (3) Gemdale's track record of providing financial support to Famous.
Famous' standalone credit profile is constrained by the small scale of its operations, its weak financial metrics and potential volatility in its sales performance. However, the standalone credit profile also factors in operational benefits arising from the company's status as a core subsidiary of Gemdale, such as cost efficiencies and a strong brand name.
Famous' liquidity is weak. Nonetheless, Moody's expects the company will continue to receive funding support from Gemdale, given its close linkage with Gemdale.
The B1 senior unsecured ratings on the bonds and the (P)B1 senior unsecured rating on the MTN program guaranteed by Famous are not affected by subordination to claims at the operating companies. This is because Moody's expects support from Gemdale will flow through the holding company rather than directly to its main operating companies, thereby mitigating any differences in expected loss that could result from structural subordination.
In terms of environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors, Gemdale's Credit Impact Scores of CIS-4 reflects the impact of ESG attributes, especially governance risk, on its ratings.
For Famous, Moody's has also taken into account its private company status and low corporate transparency. However, Gemdale's 100% ownership of the company, established governance structure and history of providing support to its subsidiary mitigate these risks.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Moody's will review Gemdale's ability (1) to recover its funding access to debt capital markets; (2) to strengthen its contracted sales and financial metrics; and (3) to maintain sufficient liquidity amid volatile operating and funding conditions.
The ratings are unlikely to be upgraded given the ratings are on review for downgrade.
However, Moody's could confirm the ratings if the company strengthens its contracted sales, financial metrics and access to various types of funding at stable costs, all on a sustained basis.
On the other hand, the ratings could be downgraded if the company is unable to improve its contracted sales or recover its access to funding, such that its liquidity profile deteriorates more than the agency expected.
Key metrics indicative of a downgrade include EBIT/interest coverage falling below 2.5x and adjusted debt/EBITDA rising above 6.5x, all on a sustained basis.
Famous' rating is also unlikely to be upgraded given the ratings are on review for downgrade.
However, Moody's could confirm Famous' rating if Gemdale's rating is confirmed, and its standalone credit quality, as well as the support from Gemdale remain unchanged.
On the other hand, Famous' rating could come under pressure if (1) Gemdale's rating is downgraded; or (2) Gemdale reduces its ownership of, or lowers its support for, Famous.
Moody's could also downgrade Famous' rating if the company's credit profile or liquidity deteriorates materially.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Homebuilding and Property Development published in October 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394515. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Incorporated in China and listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, Gemdale Corporation is a leading developer in China's residential property sector. As of the end of 2022, the company's land bank totaled around 52 million square meters (sqm) in saleable gross floor area (GFA) across about 78 cities in China.
Incorporated in Hong Kong SAR, China in 1995, Famous Commercial Limited is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Gemdale Corporation. The company also serves as Gemdale's funding vehicle in overseas markets.
