Moody's downgrades Container Store's CFR to B2
New York, August 30, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's)  downgraded The Container Store, Inc.'s ("Container Store") corporate family rating (CFR) to B2 from B1, its probability of default rating (PDR) to B2-PD from B1-PD and its senior secured term loan (Term B-3) to B2 from B1. Its speculative grade liquidity rating (SGL) remains SGL-3. The outlook remains stable.
The downgrades reflect the continuing weakness in its product categories which has weighed on its operating performance and credit metrics as debt interest costs rise. Moody's expects continued comparable store sales weakness and margin compression which will result in EBIT/interest of around 1.0x and debt/EBITDA of 3.6x in fiscal 2023. The downgrade also reflects governance considerations, including its short duration capital structure coupled with adequate liquidity as business volatility has increased, which resulted in the change in its governance score to a G-4 from G-3. Container Store's CIS score was also lowered to CIS-4 from CIS-3 as a result of its governance score being lowered to G-4 from G-3.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: The Container Store, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B2 from B1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to B2-PD from B1-PD
.... Senior Secured Term Loan B3, Downgraded to B2 from B1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: The Container Store, Inc.
.... Outlook, Remains Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Container Store, Inc.'s B2 CFR reflects its small scale as well as its narrow focus on the cyclical home storage and organization space. The company also faces intense competition from larger and well capitalized peers. The rating also reflects Container Store's weak interest coverage.  Container Store's credit metrics are expected to weaken further in fiscal 2023 before returning to adjusted debt/EBITDA of 3.1x and EBIT/interest expense of 1.4x at the end of fiscal 2024 as the company remains well positioned to return to growth after a period of consumer weakness for its products following years of elevated spending. The ratings benefit from Container Store's recognized brand name and its value proposition supported by a highly trained sales force and a sizeable offering of exclusive and proprietary products, in particular custom closets.
The stable outlook reflects Moody's expectation that Container Store will maintain at least adequate liquidityr and improve profitability and cash flow in fiscal 2024.
The SGL-3 reflects Container Store's moderate cash balances and Moody's expectation that free cash flow will be neutral in fiscal 2023 and turn positive in fiscal 2024 as the company is poised to return to revenue and operating earnings growth. As of July 1, 2023, the company had approximately $12 million of balance sheet cash and approximately $72 million of availability under the $100 million asset based revolving credit facility (ABL) and $10 million available on the SEK 110 million Elfa revolving credit facility.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Ratings could be upgraded if Container Store sustains solid operating performance, conservative financial strategies and good liquidity. Quantitatively, the ratings could be upgraded if debt/EBITDA is sustained below 4.0x and EBIT/interest expense is sustained above 2.0x.
The ratings could be downgraded if earnings or liquidity decline for any reason or should its path to a significant improvement in sales growth and profitability in fiscal 2024 stall. Quantitatively, ratings could be downgraded if debt/EBITDA is sustained above 4.75x or EBIT/interest below 1.25x.
The Container Store, Inc., is a retailer of storage and organization products in the US and Europe. The company operates in the US through its 97 specialty retail stores and website, and in Europe through its wholly owned Swedish subsidiary, Elfa International AB (Elfa). Net revenue for the LTM period ended July 1, 2023, was approximately $992 million. The company has been publicly traded since its 2013.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Retail published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356421. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
