Moody's downgrades Kunming Rail Transit to Ba1 with a negative outlook
Hong Kong, August 18, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Ba1 corporate family rating (CFR) to Kunming Rail Transit Group Co., Ltd. (KRT) and has withdrawn the company's Baa3 issuer rating.
Moody's has also downgraded to Ba1 from Baa3 the senior unsecured rating on the USD bonds issued by KRT.
The outlook is negative. Previously, the ratings were on review for downgrade.
This rating action concludes the review for downgrade initiated on 29 June 2023.
"The rating downgrade reflects KRT's continued diminishing access to funding alongside further deterioration in the regional funding environment. In addition, the lack of significant improvement in sufficiency and timeliness of government support exacerbates the company's liquidity pressure," says Stephen Tang, a Moody's Assistant Vice President and Analyst.
"We acknowledge Kunming Rail's strategic significance as the provincial capital's metro owner and operator with the high willingness of Kunming city government to extend direct financial support, or indirect support. However, such efforts are unlikely to fully offset KRT's weak liquidity buffer and investors' aversion toward local government financing vehicles in the region," adds Tang.
The negative outlook reflects the uncertainty around the company's ability to improve its funding channels, and the adequacy and timeliness of government support for the company amid pressure on the capacity of Kunming city to support its government-owned issuers, some of which are facing escalating refinancing challenges. Moreover, the uncertain recovery of the weakening local economy and land market, combined with a high debt and contingent liability burden, will continue to put pressure on Kunming government's ability to provide timely support to its local government financing vehicles (LGFVs) over the next 12-18 months.
RATINGS RATIONALE
KRT's access to funding remains very constrained, given continued risk aversion among investors toward LGFVs in weaker regions such as Yunnan and Kunming. In 2022 and 2023 year to date, issuances and net financing from these LGFVs declined substantially in the onshore bond market with shortening debt tenors and increasing funding costs. Moreover, KRT's outstanding onshore bonds which will all come due in 2024, as such the company remain in need of onshore refinancing over the next two years.
Given its weakened funding access which is constrained by the weak regional funding environment, Moody's expects that KRT will likely need to rely on government support to meet its funding needs. Moody's estimates KRT's cash received from the government in the 2023 year-to-date decreased significantly compared with the historical average, as reflected in the decline of the company's reported cash balance in recent periods. Although over 70% of its debt will come due in 2026 or thereafter, KRT's liquidity buffer does not support its rating at the investment-grade level.
Moody's acknowledges Kunming Rail's strategic significance as the provincial capital's metro owner and operator and the high willingness of Kunming city government to extend direct financial support, or indirect support; for example, by coordinating with financial institutions for long-term low cost financing.
While the government's coordinated efforts could help alleviate the company's short-term funding pressure, Moody's expects uncertainties remains with KRT's access to the capital market, considering investors' risk aversion and the absence of precise and comprehensive debt refinancing scheme.
Moody's will also closely monitor the timeliness and effectiveness of the coordination from the government to meet the company's funding needs. If the company does not receive adequate and timely cash payment from the government to cover its funding needs, nor material improvements in its liquidity buffer, the rating will come under further downward pressure.
KRT's Ba1 corporate family rating incorporates the Kunming's government capacity to support (GCS) score of baa3 and Moody's assessment of how the company's characteristics affect the government's propensity to provide support, resulting in a one-notch adjustment from the GCS score.
Moody's assessment of Kunming's GCS score reflects (1) the city's status as the provincial capital of Yunnan province; (2) the province's lower level of development and higher debt burden compared with its peers; and (3) Kunming's very large fiscal deficit and large debt and contingent liability burden relative to other provincial capitals, and weak funding conditions for the city's LGFVs.
However, the one-notch downward adjustment from the Kunming government's GCS score reflects KRT's weak funding access and the weakened predictability of government payment.
The company's credit profile is also constrained by the weak credit profile of its regional and local government (RLG) owners, and that its financing capacity is vulnerable to market volatility driven by investors' widespread risk aversion toward state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and LGFVs from the region.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
An upgrade of the ratings is unlikely, given the negative outlook. However, Moody's could revise the outlook to stable if (1) Kunming's fiscal and debt situation materially improve over the 12-18 months, potentially as a result of a stronger-than-expected recovery in fiscal revenue, leading to a stabilization of its governmental capacity to support; and (2) KRT receives adequate and timely government payments to meet its funding needs, and strengthens its liquidity buffer.
Moody's could downgrade KRT's ratings if (1) China's sovereign rating is downgraded or Kunming's GCS weakens, which could arise if Kunming remains challenged by very large fiscal deficits, and in the absence of materially greater financial support from higher-tier governments; (2) changes occur in the Chinese government's policies that prohibit RLGs from providing financial support to LGFVs; (3) KRT's characteristics change in a way that weakens Kunming's propensity to provide support, such as:
- a weakening of the company's position as the major platform that undertakes metro projects in Kunming;
- its core businesses undergo significant changes, including a substantial expansion into commercial activities that results in significant losses or comes at the cost of public services;
- its debt and leverage rapidly increase without a corresponding rise in government payments, leaving the company reliant on high-cost financing, including through nonstandard channels;
- it significantly increases loans, guarantees or other credit exposures to external parties from the current levels; or
- the company's credit and financial profile weakens because it is required to provide financial support to other LGFVs or SOEs in Kunming or Yunnan province, or because of a merger or acquisition with other LGFVs or SOEs.
- adverse changes occur in the ongoing government support mechanism, in terms of timeliness, predictability and adequacy of support.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Local Government Financing Vehicles in China Methodology published in April 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386644. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Established in 2009, Kunming Rail Transit Group Co., Ltd. (KRT) is the sole platform to own, construct and operate the metro system in Kunming on behalf of the Kunming government. The company is wholly owned by the Kunming government, through the Kunming State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (90%) and the Yunnan Department of Finance (10%).
The local market analyst for this rating is Elaine Lai, +86 (21) 2057-4018.
