Moody's downgrades Wolverine's CFR to B1; outlook remains negative
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded Wolverine World Wide, Inc.'s (Wolverine) ratings, including the corporate family rating (CFR) to B1 from Ba3, probability of default rating (PDR) to B1-PD from Ba3-PD, and senior unsecured global notes rating to B3 from B1. The speculative grade liquidity (SGL) rating was downgraded to SGL-3 from SGL-2. The outlook remains negative.
The CFR, PDR and unsecured notes rating downgrades reflect the company's significant earnings decline in Q2 2023 and Moody's expectations for continued weak near-term performance. Wolverine's revenue declines and margin compression have been driven by elevated inventory and retailer de-stocking in the footwear category, as well its own inventory and product management missteps. Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA was 8.5x as of Q2 2023 (including standard adjustments for operating leases, pensions, and the accounts receivable securitization program) and EBITA/interest expense was 1.6x. Moody's expects debt/EBITDA to decline to the mid-7x by year-end 2023 driven by revolver paydown with free cash flow and proceeds from planned asset sales. In 2024, Moody's projects leverage to decline to 5x, reflecting earnings recovery from lower freight costs, reduced clearance activity and cost reduction measures. Execution risk remains high despite accelerated actions by Wolverine's new executive leadership to delever the balance sheet, improve processes and technology and invest in its core growth brands.
The SGL downgrade to SGL-3 from SGL-2 reflects increased risks to cash flow generation as the company looks to generate significant cash from reducing inventory in an uncertain macroeconomic environment and pursue material asset sales to support debt repayment.
The downgrades also reflect governance considerations, including the company's historical focus on share repurchases and acquisitions, which together with weak operational execution in the face of a tough retail environment have weakened its credit metrics and liquidity. Wolverine's credit impact score was lowered to CIS-4 from CIS-3 as a result of its governance score being lowered to G-4 from G-3. The change in the governance score to G-4 from G-3 is related to its financial strategy.  
The outlook remains negative, reflecting the risk to earnings and cash flow from weak consumer spending and a highly promotional environment, which may prevent Wolverine from improving its credit metrics to a level that is appropriate for the B1 CFR.
Moody's took the following rating actions for Wolverine World Wide, Inc.:
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B1 from Ba3
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to B1-PD from Ba3-PD
....  Senior Unsecured Global Notes, Downgraded to B3 from B1
.. Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Downgraded to SGL-3 from SGL-2
.... Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Wolverine's B1 CFR benefits from its diversified global distribution in the footwear industry and a product portfolio that appeals to a broad range of consumer needs and demographics, which has historically mitigated earnings volatility. The rating also reflects its ownership of Merrell and Saucony, which are well-recognized and differentiated brands representing around 50% of sales. Although execution risk remains high and the macroeconomic environment uncertain, Wolverine's credit profile is expected to improve significantly upon successful execution of its goals for streamlining costs, selling weaker brands and investing in its core brands to maximize their growth and margin potential. Moody's expects the company to have adequate liquidity for the next 12-18 months, reflecting expectations for positive free cash flow driven by inventory reduction, lack of near-term debt maturities, good excess revolver availability, and adequate covenant cushion.
Wolverine's ratings are constrained by its high leverage and narrow product focus primarily in the fashion-sensitive footwear segment. Many of its brands have relatively low direct-to-consumer penetration, which limits the company's ability to leverage consumer insights. These brands also have a small revenue scale in highly competitive categories. While Wolverine is prioritizing debt reduction, its past decisions have contributed to high leverage levels, including funding the Sweaty Betty acquisition with revolver borrowings in Q3 2021 and continuing share repurchases through Q2 2022, instead of paying down debt. Wolverine is also subject to social and environmental risks related to responsible sourcing, waste and pollution including PFAS remediation and litigation, the treatment of work force, natural capital and customer relations.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Although unlikely in the near term, the ratings could be upgraded if earnings, financial leverage and cash flow generation recover on a sustained basis. An upgrade would also require a streamlined portfolio and a return to sustainable revenue and operating growth in each of Wolverine's key brands. Quantitative measures include Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA sustained below 4.75x and EBITA/interest expense sustained above 2.5x.
The ratings could be downgraded if liquidity deteriorates, including lower than expected cash generation or tighter covenant cushion. A lack of meaningful near-term business recovery or failure to reduce debt levels could also result in a downgrade. The ratings could also be downgraded if there are material adverse regulatory or litigation developments related to the company's environmental liabilities. Quantitative measures include Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA sustained above 5.5x or EBITA/interest expense below 1.75x.
Headquartered in Rockford, Michigan, Wolverine World Wide, Inc. is a designer and marketer of casual, active lifestyle, work, outdoor sport, athletic, and uniform footwear and apparel. The company's portfolio of brands includes Merrell, Saucony, Sperry, Sweaty Betty, Hush Puppies, Wolverine, Chaco, Bates, and HYTEST. The company also is the global footwear licensee of the Cat and Harley-Davidson brands. Revenue for the latest twelve months ended July 1, 2023 was $2.5 billion.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Apparel published in June 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/72775. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
