Moody's downgrades Emergent BioSolutions' CFR to Caa1; outlook negative
New York, August 22, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") downgraded the ratings of Emergent BioSolutions Inc. ("Emergent") including the Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to Caa1 from B3, the Probability of Default Rating to Caa1-PD from B3-PD, the senior unsecured rating to Caa3 from Caa2 and the  Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating to SGL-4 from SGL-3. Following this action, the outlook remains negative.
The downgrades reflect volatility in US government ordering patterns for key Emergent products, creating ongoing earnings pressure and elevated financial leverage. Over the next several quarters, lower anthrax and smallpox sales will more than offset solid Narcan sales and the positive impact of aggressive new cost reduction efforts. Moody's believes that underlying demand from the US government for Emergent's medical countermeasure products is becoming less certain, raising the company's credit risk profile. Despite the benefits of cost reductions, Emergent's earnings are becoming more difficult to predict. Absent a substantial turnaround in financial performance driven by strong underlying demand, Emergent faces potential covenant violations and rising exposure to refinancing risk given the May 2025 expiration of its credit agreement.
Social and governance considerations are key drivers of the rating action. Social risk exposures include customer relations, with elevated risk stemming from the volatility in US government ordering patterns and less certain demand. Key governance drivers include management credibility and track record, and financial policy and risk management, highlighted by a recent reductions in 2023 earnings guidance.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Emergent BioSolutions Inc.
....Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Caa1 from B3
....Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to Caa1-PD from B3-PD
....Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Downgraded to SGL-4 from SGL-3
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to Caa3 from Caa2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Emergent BioSolutions Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Emergent's Caa1 Corporate Family Rating reflects its niche position supplying products that address public health threats. Notwithstanding quarterly volatility, Moody's expects solid ongoing sales of medical countermeasures to the US Strategic National Stockpile and continuation of high barriers to entry. In addition, the nasal naloxone business will benefit from upcoming expansion into the over-the-counter market, although at a reduced price point. Including nasal naloxone, the company's products business has strong gross margins of around 60%.
Tempering these strengths, the timing and underlying demand for medical countermeasure products is becoming less predictable. This exacerbates Emergent's other credit challenges including operating losses in the contract development and manufacturing organization ("CDMO") business and competitive pressure on nasal naloxone including generic exposure. Emergent's CDMO business faces high albeit declining operating costs, and the company recently announced plans to significantly reduce CDMO operations and de-emphasize growth. Until these efforts produce sustained earnings improvement, gross debt/EBITDA will remain elevated.
The SGL-4 speculative grade liquidity rating reflects Moody's view that Emergent's liquidity is weak, stemming from a rising likelihood that credit agreement covenant modifications will be required. Financial covenants under the amended credit facilities include minimum LTM EBITDA levels through March 31, 2024 followed by maximum leverage of 4.5x and minimum fixed charge coverage of 2.25x beginning March 31, 2024. The fixed charge covenant steps up to 2.5x at March 31, 2025. The credit agreement also requires Emergent to issue at least $75 million of equity or unsecured debt by April 30, 2024. To date, the company has issued $9 million of at-the-money equity. Emergent reported $89 million of cash on hand as of June 30, 2023 and approximately $50 million of availability under the $300 million revolving credit facility expiring in May 2025. Term loan amortization and maintenance capital expenditures are modest, but cash flow is likely to continue to exhibit significant quarterly volatility.
The Caa3 rating on the senior unsecured notes reflects the presence of a material amount of secured debt in Emergent's capital structure. The final rating reflects Moody's estimate for low recovery on the senior unsecured notes in the event of default.
Emergent's CIS-5 (previously CIS-4) indicates that the rating is lower than it would have been if ESG risk exposures did not exist and that the negative impact is more pronounced than for issuers scored CIS-4. Emergent's G-5 score (previously G-4) reflects governance challenges including those related to management credibility and track record, and financial strategy and risk management. Social risk exposures reflected in the S-5 score (previously S-4) include customer relations and responsible production exposures related to manufacturing compliance standards. Emergent's largest customer is the US government, and reduced predictability into procurement for the US Strategic National Stockpile is a key credit risk exposure.
The outlook is negative, reflecting slowing procurement from the US government, high operating losses in the CDMO business, and weak liquidity. Although aggressive cost reductions will benefit earnings, Moody's does not believe the credit profile has sufficiently stabilized until financial performance more clearly rebounds and cushion under financial covenants improves.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Factors that could lead to a downgrade include a deterioration in liquidity including weak cash flow or covenant violations, significant delays in US government procurement, or material pressure on the Narcan Nasal Spray franchise.
Factors that could lead to an upgrade include greater consistency in US government procurement patterns, sustained improvement in earnings, and improved liquidity.
Headquartered in Gaithersburg, Maryland, Emergent BioSolutions Inc. is a life sciences company that provides pharmaceuticals, vaccines, medical devices and contract manufacturing services related to public health threats affecting civilian and military populations. Revenue for the 12 months ended June 30, 2023 totaled approximately $1.1 billion.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Pharmaceuticals published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356413. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
