Moody's downgrades Scotts Miracle-Gro's CFR to B1; outlook is stable
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") downgraded The Scotts Miracle-Gro Company's ("Scotts") Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to B1 from Ba3 and the Probability of Default Rating (PDR) to B1-PD from Ba3-PD. The senior unsecured note ratings were downgraded to B2 from B1. The outlook is stable.
The downgrades reflect Moody's expectation that leverage will remain very high for longer than previously expected reflecting mounting pressure in the lawn and garden category and continued weakness at Hawthorne. Liquidity is adequate because of unused revolver capacity and projected free cash flow but remains constrained by modest cushion under the recently amended financial maintenance covenants. Scotts' recent guidance revisions account for weaker volumes in U.S Consumer from retailers reducing inventory levels in response to sluggish consumer demand. Engagement in the lawn and garden category is moderating from pandemic supported highs and the impact from unfavorable weather. Higher commodity and labor costs are also pressuring the EBITDA margin. Hawthorne remains a drag on earnings due to the challenging oversupply and regulatory environment in the cannabis market. Moody's sees earnings remaining under pressure for the balance of 2023 but believes that Scott's leading market position in the lawn and garden category and strong relationships with large retailers. Lower commodity prices as well as cost cutting initiative from Project Springboard are supportive of improvement to the EBITDA margin in fiscal 2024. Moody's also expects that U.S Consumer performance will improve from depressed levels as volumes and retailer inventory replenishments stabilize. Moody's nevertheless anticipates that it will take multiple years of better operating performance to translate to meaningful improvement to credit metrics. Moody's anticipates that debt-to-EBITDA leverage will peak just shy of 8.0x for the twelve months ended December 31, 2023 before gradually improving to around 4.5x by the fiscal year ending September 2025 (6.6x; Moody's adjusted for the 12-months ended July 1, 2023). Scotts' long-term net leverage target ratio of 3-3.5x (based on the company calculations; 6.10x for the 12-months ending July 1, 2023 in part due to seasonal borrowings) reinforces management's commitment to reducing leverage. Scotts remains on track to generate roughly $600-$650 million of projected free cash flow (after dividends) in fiscal 2023 and 2024 that are ultimately expected to go towards debt repayment. However, this will only partially reverse the significant increase in debt over the last two years resulting from negative free cash flow, acquisitions and share repurchase and leverage will remain high for several years.
Liquidity is projected to remain adequate over the next 12 -15 months, as denoted by the company's SGL-3 speculative grade liquidity rating, because of projected tightness in the financial maintenance covenant. Scotts recently amended financial maintenance covenants offer moderate relief to navigate credit stresses, but Moody's sees limited room for deterioration in the EBITDA margin and the covenant could impact Scotts' capacity to borrow on the revolver and overall financial flexibility. Moody's expects good free cash flow generation of around $600-$650 million after dividends combined in fiscals 2023 and 2024 supported by working capital improvement as the company sells down elevated inventory. However, the company will need to utilize free cash flow to reduce net debt ahead of the step-down of the maximum net debt-to-EBITDA leverage covenant on the revolving credit facility. The covenant is 7.00x currently and will increase 8.25x at December 30, 2023 and 7.75x at March 30, 2024 to accommodate projected earnings pressure and seasonal requirements before stepping down meaningfully to 6.5x at June 29, 2024 and 4.5x after September 30, 2025. Higher credit spreads on the amended revolving and term loan credit facilities will put some pressure on free cash flow. Scotts also reduced its total revolver capacity by $250 million to $1.25 billion – a level that Moody's see as providing adequate coverage for the company's seasonal borrowing needs. The reduction could nevertheless limit flexibility particularly if the company is unable to replace its receivables facility, which expired August 18, 2023. As of July 1, 2023, Scotts' had $27.4 million of cash and cash equivalents on its balance sheet and $145.1 million borrowed on its $1,250 million revolving credit facility that expires in April 2027. Moody's believes the cash, projected free cash flow and unused revolver capacity provide adequate coverage of projected cash needs with a required $50 million of annual term loan amortization and $250 million unsecured notes that mature in December 2026 the only meaningful debt maturities until the unrated term loan and revolver come due in April 2027.
The downgrade of the senior unsecured notes to B2 reflects a one notch upward override to the B3 loss given default model outcome based on Moody's estimate that expected recovery in a default scenario is better reflected at the B2 rating level because of the company's strong market position.
Moody's took the following rating actions:
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Scotts Miracle-Gro Company (The)
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to B1 from Ba3
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to B1-PD from Ba3-PD
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to B2 from B1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Scotts Miracle-Gro Company (The)
....Outlook, changed to stable from negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Scotts Miracle-Gro's B1 CFR reflects the company's high leverage and adequate liquidity relative to the seasonality of earnings and cash flows, sensitivity to chemical prices and weather patterns and a highly concentrated customer base. The company's use of fertilizers, pesticides, and other specialty chemicals expose the credit profile to environmental and societal risks as consumers have shown an increasing preference for organics and as exhibited by the brand image risk associated with the weed killer Roundup and use of chemicals such as 2, 4-D and Glyphosate. Moody's anticipates earnings in the US Consumer lawn and garden segment will improve in fiscal 2024 as retailer inventory replenishment orders stabilize to more predictive levels especially if weather conditions improve relative to recent years. Further, restructuring actions at Hawthorne should help stem losses in the segment though material earnings improvement remains highly uncertain given the regulatory and oversupply conditions in the cannabis market. Additionally, cost savings related to Project Springboard and lower commodity costs going forward  will also drive recovery in the EBITDA margin. However, Moody's expects that Moody's adjusted debt-to-EBITDA will continue to constrain the company's credit profile but slowly improve to 4.5x by the fiscal year ended September 2025 from 6.6x for the 12 months ending June 2023. Moody's projects free cash flow after dividends will be strong at $600-$650 million cumulative in fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2024 because working capital will be reduced and support debt repayment. Thereafter, Moody's expects free cash flow to moderate to a level above $100 million in fiscal 2025.
Scotts' leading market position in the North American lawn and garden industry affords it a strong relationship with key retailers and drives strong brand recognition at the point of sale. Brand support and product development help the company retain its market share. The expansion into hydroponics presents a long-term growth opportunity but the market is currently challenged with oversupply conditions. The cannabis industry also faces regulatory headwinds and volatile volumes as it gains scale. Scotts' consumer-oriented products are relatively resilient to economic downturns, but profitability has faced pressures from higher chemical prices and consumers economizing spending during market downturns. Shareholder distributions are aggressive including large special dividends and share buybacks although distributions are currently restricted to a maximum $225 million in dividends and $25 million of additional restricted payments until October 1, 2025 unless pro forma net leverage is below 4.0x, coinciding with the step-down of the revised covenants to 4.5x for the quarter ending December 27, 2025.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The outlook is stable reflecting Moody's expectation that Scotts will be able to take advantage of its strong market position and relationship with retailers in the U.S lawn and garden category to deliver meaningful operational improvement and generate strong free cash flow such that the company will reduce debt-to-EBITDA leverage to below 5.0x (outside of seasonal borrowings) within two years. Moody's also anticipates in the stable outlook that Scotts will remain in compliance with its newly amended financial maintenance covenants and liquidity and financial flexibility will gradually improve. Moody's also expect that Scotts will continue to reduce debt levels and manage shareholder distributions to reach its stated 3.0-3.5x net leverage target and remain in compliance of covenants.
Ratings could be upgraded if operating performance improves such that debt-to-EBITDA is maintained below 4.0x (outside of seasonal borrowings). An upgrade would also require stabilization of Hawthorne's operating performance and good liquidity. Scotts would also need to generate consistent and sizable free cash flow and maintain a shareholder distribution philosophy consistent with maintenance of a higher rating.
Ratings could be downgraded if Moody's does not see meaningful improvement to the EBITDA margin or free cash flow due to continued operating pressure and lower volumes such that debt-to-EBITDA leverage is not expected to improve to below 5.0x by fiscal September 2025. The rating could also be downgraded if liquidity deteriorates including if the company is not able to improve the covenant cushion or shareholder distributions impair expected balance sheet improvement.
ENVIRONMENTAL SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
Scotts Miracle-Gro's CIS-3 indicates that ESG considerations have a limited impact on the current rating with potential for greater negative impact over time. The CIS score reflects the company's exposure and production of consumer lawn & garden fertilizers, pesticides, and social risks related to responsible production and waste management. Governance risks account for the high use of leverage, aggressive shareholder distributions, and the Hagedorn family's ownership of 25% of the outstanding shares. Multiple years of underperformance to company targets including operating materially above its stated 3.0-3.5x net leverage target increase governance concerns as it relates to management credibility and track record.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Consumer Packaged Goods published in June 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/389866. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
The Scotts Miracle-Gro Company ("Scotts" or "SMG") is a manufacturer and marketer of consumer lawn care and garden products as well as hydroponic growing products, primarily in North America (approximately 91% of sales). The Hagedorn family owns 25% of the publicly-traded company, which generated revenue of about $3.7 billion for the 12 month period ended July 1, 2023.          
