Moody's downgrades Class A Notes in Aqui SPV S.r.l.
Frankfurt am Main, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service, ("Moody's") has today downgraded the ratings of the Class A Notes in Aqui SPV S.r.l. The rating action reflects lower than anticipated cash-flows generated from the recovery process on the non-performing loans (NPLs):
....EUR544.7M Class A Notes, Downgraded to Ba2 (sf); previously on Jul 2, 2020 Confirmed at Baa3 (sf)
RATINGS RATIONALE
The rating action is prompted by lower than anticipated cash-flows generated from the recovery process on the NPLs.
Lower than anticipated cash-flows generated from the recovery process on the NPLs:
As of March 2023 the Cumulative Collection Ratio based on collections net of legal and procedural costs was at 84.14%, meaning that collections are coming in at lower amounts than anticipated in the original Business Plan projection. Indeed, through the 31 March 2023 collection period, nine collection periods since closing, aggregate collections net of legal and procedural costs were EUR 356.31 million versus original business plan expectations of EUR 423.55 million. Cumulative gross collections as per 2022 updated business plan are 16.12% down from original business plan expectations. In particular, while the transaction has generally seen semiannual gross collections above EUR 30.00 million per period, in the last collections period as of March 2023 gross collections dropped to around EUR 19.61 million. The most recent business plan updated in September 2022 expects a total amount of future net collections lower than the outstanding amount of the Class A Notes.
PV Cumulative Profitability Ratio, for which we observe a declining trend, stood at 104.37% as of March 2023, however it only refers to closed positions while the time to process open positions and the future collections on those remain to be seen.
In terms of the underlying portfolio, the reported GBV stood at EUR 1.17 billion as of June 2023 down from EUR 2.06 billion at closing. Borrowers are mainly corporates (around 82.87%) and around 38% of the GBV is concentrated in the North East regions of Italy, in particular in the Emilia Romagna region (about 34%).
Moody's notes that the advance rate, the ratio between the size of the most senior tranche in the transaction and its GBV, stood at 23.21% as of April 2023. As of this date, the interest subordination event has occurred due to underperformance. Deferred interest amounts on the Class B Notes amount to EUR 2.85 million. Around 16.62% of total actual gross collections up the March 2023 collection period came from Notesales strategies (i.e. an outright disposal or sale of one or more NPL portfolio claims), which is higher than the average observed for similar transactions. Moody's notes that Notesales, although often allowing for a speedier recovery process, risk depleting the value of the securitized pool.
NPL transactions' cash flows depend on the timing and amount of collections. Due to the current economic environment, Moody's has considered additional stresses in its analysis, including a 6 to 12-months delay in the recovery timing. Moody's has taken into account the potential cost of the GACS Guarantee within its cash flow modelling, while any potential benefit from the guarantee for the senior Noteholders has not been considered in its analysis. Benchmarking and performance considerations against other Italian NPLs have also been factored in the analysis.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Non-Performing and Re-Performing Loan Securitizations Methodology published in July 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/390474. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Factors that would lead to an upgrade or downgrade of the rating:
Factors or circumstances that could lead to an upgrade of the rating include: (1) the recovery process of the non-performing loans producing significantly higher cash-flows in a shorter time frame than expected; (2) improvements in the credit quality of the transaction counterparties; and (3) a decrease in sovereign risk.
Factors or circumstances that could lead to a downgrade of the rating include: (1) significantly lower or slower cash-flows generated from the recovery process on the non-performing loans due to either a longer time for the courts to process the foreclosures and bankruptcies, a change in economic conditions from our central scenario forecast or idiosyncratic performance factors. For instance, should economic conditions be worse than forecasted and the sale of the properties generate less cash-flows for the issuer or take a longer time to sell the properties, all these factors could result in a downgrade of the ratings; (2) deterioration in the credit quality of the transaction counterparties; and (3) increase in sovereign risk.
