Moody's downgrades Newell Brands to Ba2, outlook remains negative
New York, August 21, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded Newell Brands Inc.'s ("Newell") ratings including its Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to Ba2 from Ba1, its Probability of Default Rating (PDR) to Ba2-PD from Ba1-PD, and its senior unsecured debt instrument ratings to Ba2 from Ba1.  The commercial paper rating was affirmed at NP (not prime). The outlook remains negative and the speculative grade liquidity rating ("SGL") remains unchanged at SGL-3.
The ratings downgrade reflects continued pressure on Newell's business segments and profitability from weaker consumer demand and inventory destocking, which Moody's anticipates will continue for the remainder of 2023 and into early next year.  The company's operating performance continues to be negatively impacted by high cost inflation which has pressured Newell's margins, as well as lower discretionary spending by  consumers who have been squeezed by the higher price of most essentials.  In addition, reduced  purchasing by retailers who are seeking to lower inventory costs due to the diminished demand and some disruption stemming from bankruptcy closings by an important retailer have compounded the challenges. Together these issues have resulted in double digit sales and earnings declines across most of Newell's operating segments. Additionally, the company's ability to take pricing actions to offset lower volume is limited in Moody's view given the discretionary nature of most of the products. The persistent inflationary environment continues to burden consumers who have reduced purchases of discretionary products such as home fragrance, food storage, small appliances, cookware, and recreational goods. Downside risks remain that a prolonged inflationary environment or a recession could put additional pressure on consumers and delay recovery well into mid-2024.  
Moody's expects some recovery in discretionary consumer purchases starting in the first half of 2024 as inflation moderates and consumer purchasing recovers absent a deep recession. Furthermore Newell's operating performance will start to show stabilization in the second half of 2023 despite persistent weak consumer demand when it cycles through the second half of 2022, which was materially weaker due to retail inventory destocking. Moody's expects sales will end full year 2023 about 13% lower than 2022 while EBIT margins will be weak at around to 6.75%.  Moody's expects Newell to generate about $125 million to $225 million of annual free cash flows (after payment of an already 70% reduced dividend) over the next year largely due to a reduction in working capital.  Financial leverage as measured by Moody's debt-to-EBITDA will peak at around 6.25x by year end 2023 and then moderate to around 5.0x by the end of 2024.  However, prolonged weak demand could curtail the rapid deleveraging needed to maintain the current ratings.  
The negative outlook reflects elevated risks over the next 12 to 18 months that inflation may persist or a recession could materialize resulting in consumers remaining cautious with discretionary purchases. Given the discretionary nature of some of Newell's products, its operating performance could remain weak for a prolonged period resulting in weaker cash flow and persistent elevated financial leverage.
The SGL-3 reflects the company's weaker than usual cash flow generation ability, which will remain below historic levels  despite the company having significantly reduced its dividend. This will result in greater reliance on its revolving credit facility to support seasonal working capital needs and a narrower cushion in the company's revolver covenant requirement to maintain an EBITDA to interest expense ratio (bank defined) at above 3.0x over the next three quarters. Newell's adequate liquidity reflects cash on hand of $317 million as of June 30, 2023 of which approximately 84% was held outside the US. The company also had approximately $950 million of unused capacity under its $1.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility expiring in August 2027 (unrated). The company also has a committed $375 million receivable securitization facility with borrowings of $66 million.  However, this facility is set to expire in October 2023. The company's next maturity is $200 million of notes due in December 2024 and $500 million of notes due in June 2025.  
Downgrades:
..Issuer: Newell Brands Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Ba2 from Ba1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Downgraded to Ba2-PD from Ba1-PD
....Senior Unsecured Medium-Term Note Program, Downgraded to (P)Ba2 from (P)Ba1
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Downgraded to Ba2 from Ba1
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Newell Brands Inc.
....Commercial Paper, Affirmed NP
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Newell Brands Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Negative
RATINGS RATIONALE
Newell's Ba2 CFR reflects its large scale, well recognized brands, and good product and geographic diversity. The rating is constrained by concerns around the long-term growth prospects of the company's mature product categories such as small appliances and cookware, food storage, and writing that require constant investment and innovation to spur growth and retain market share. The rating also reflects the cyclicality and discretionary nature of some of its products that have been negatively impacted during the current weak environment. The dividend payment somewhat constraints its financial flexibility, especially during economic weakness, because it weakens free cash flow as a time when leverage is increasing. Debt-to-EBITDA leverage of 6.4x as of June 30, 2023 is very weak for the Ba2 rating. Moody's believes that the company's 2.5x net debt-to-EBITDA leverage target indicates management's desire to reduce leverage over the longer term, and the Ba2 rating is based on Moody's view that leverage will decline from this lofty level.  
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Newell's ESG Credit Impact Score of CIS-3 indicates that ESG factors have a limited impact on the current rating, with greater potential for future negative impact. As with most consumer durables companies, Newell's exposure to environmental risks reflects carbon transition and natural capital associated with manufacturing of its goods. Newell's exposure to social risks reflects some exposure to demographic and social trends, health and safety and responsible production. The company's moderate governance practices in the context of the company's business profile positions it below average. Governance risk is driven primarily by its financial strategy and risk management policies reflected in a history of leveraging acquisitions done by past management, share repurchases and a dividend payout, albeit reduced, despite the substantially elevated leverage and reduced guidance for the year. The company has a reasonably conservative stated net debt to EBITDA target of 2.5x, but it is far away from this target.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Ratings could be upgraded if Newell delivers good operating execution including sustained organic revenue growth with EBITDA margin recovering at least to the mid-teens percent range while maintaining a financial policy that results in sustained debt to EBITDA leverage comfortably below 4.5x. Newell would also need to improve liquidity and generate solid free cash flow relative to debt, and a demonstrated consistent strategic direction to be considered for an upgrade.
Ratings could be downgraded if Newell's revenue or EBITDA margin do not improve materially, liquidity does not improve, or the company is not able to restore strong positive free cash flow. Additionally, the ratings could be downgraded if Newell's debt-to-EBITDA is sustained above 5.0x or retained-cash-flow to net debt remains below 10%.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Consumer Durables published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74987. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Newell Brands Inc. is a global marketer of consumer and commercial products utilized in the home, office, and commercial segments. Key brands include Rubbermaid, Graco, Oster, Coleman, Sharpie, Mr. Coffee and Yankee Candle. The publicly-traded company generated $8.5 billion of revenue for the 12 months ended June 30, 2023.
