Moody's downgrades SL Green's corporate family rating to Ba2 with a negative outlook, concluding its review
New York, August 30, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has today downgraded the ratings of SL Green Realty Corp., with a negative outlook. Previously, the ratings were on review for downgrade. The rating downgrades include the REIT's senior unsecured shelf rating to (P)Ba2 from (P)Ba1, its subordinate shelf rating to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2, its junior subordinate shelf rating to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2, its preferred stock rating to B1 from Ba3, its preferred shelf rating to (P)B1 from (P)Ba3 and its preferred shelf non-cumulative rating to (P)B1 from (P)Ba3. The ratings downgrades also include SL Green Operating Partnership, L.P.'s (collectively "SL Green") corporate family rating to Ba2 from Ba1 as well as its senior unsecured shelf rating to (P)Ba2 from (P)Ba1, its subordinate shelf rating to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2, and its junior subordinate shelf rating to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2. This concludes the review for downgrade initiated on 22 May 2023.
Downgrades:
..Issuer: SL Green Operating Partnership, L.P.
....Corporate Family Rating, Downgraded to Ba2 from Ba1
....Backed Junior Subordinate Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2
....Backed Subordinate Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2
....Backed Senior Unsecured Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba2 from (P)Ba1
..Issuer: SL Green Realty Corp.
....Backed Pref. Shelf, Downgraded to (P)B1 from (P)Ba3
....Backed Pref. Shelf Non-cumulative, Downgraded to (P)B1 from (P)Ba3
....Backed Junior Subordinate Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2
....Backed Subordinate Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba3 from (P)Ba2
....Backed Senior Unsecured Shelf, Downgraded to (P)Ba2 from (P)Ba1
....Pref. Stock, Downgraded to B1 from Ba3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: SL Green Operating Partnership, L.P.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Rating Under Review
..Issuer: SL Green Realty Corp.
....Outlook, Changed To Negative From Rating Under Review
RATINGS RATIONALE
The CFR downgrade to Ba2 reflects SL Green's persistently high leverage, even considering the partial sale of 245 Park, the expected equity contribution from its One Madison Avenue joint venture, and remaining dispositions planned for the balance of the year. The partial sale of 245 Park contributed approximately $1 billion in proceeds towards management's guidance of $2 billion in dispositions in 2023. Moody's expects SL Green to defer a portion of its planned asset sales into 2024, prolonging deleveraging efforts, amid increasingly difficult financing conditions and lower investor appetite for commercial real estate.
SL Green's leverage remains very high at 14.2x net debt/EBITDA (including pro-rata share of unconsolidated joint ventures) for the TTM ending June 30, 2023. Despite the company's debt reduction initiatives, Moody's expect leverage to remain very high in the near-term given the challenging operating environment for office landlords and the resulting pressures on income and cash flows. In addition, the REIT's fixed charge coverage remains weak at 1.6x for the trailing twelve months ended June 30, 2023 amid higher interest rates, down from historical levels when its coverage ratio had been steadily above 2.0x.
SL Green's operating performance still outperforms the broader market by a wide margin with positive same-store net operating income growth and mark-to-market rents in the face of challenging operating conditions. This reflects the demand for the REIT's high-quality, and well-located Manhattan office portfolio. The REIT also has a manageable lease expiration schedule and diversified tenant base. Offsetting these strengths are the company's development and JV focused growth strategy, very high financial leverage, weak fixed charge coverage, and significant asset and geographic concentration.
SL Green's SGL-3 Speculative Grade Liquidity rating reflects the REIT's adequate liquidity. Liquidity is supported by $192 million of consolidated cash, and $820 million of availability on its $1.25 billion unsecured revolving credit facility as of second-quarter 2023. The company expects to receive $577 million of equity contribution proceeds from One Madison Avenue in October 2023. SL Green also maintains a high-quality (albeit shrinking) unencumbered asset pool that provides alternate liquidity and enhances financial flexibility. Upcoming debt maturities include $465 million of non-recourse mortgage debt due in 2023 and $1.46 billion due in 2024, consisting of $834 million in non-recourse mortgage debt and $625 million in unsecured term loan debt. The REIT will also need to address non-recourse mortgages maturing in its unconsolidated joint ventures.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Governance risks that we consider in SL Green's credit profile include the company's aggressive financial policy with persistently high leverage and secured debt. SL Green's capital structure includes a significant share of primarily non-recourse property level mortgage debt that reduces flexibility for future capital raises. Other considerations include the REIT's development and JV focused growth strategy which constrains strategic flexibility and liquidity. SL Green's exposure to highly leveraged JVs is higher than peers', and will continue to increase as the company shifts to a primarily asset management model going forward.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The negative outlook reflects the potential that leverage and coverage metrics will remain weak for a sustained period of time given the challenging operating conditions for office properties. Additionally, weakness in office property valuations and diminished investor appetite for the office sector could constrain capital access.
The ratings could be downgraded if SL Green fails to meaningfully reduce leverage below current levels or fixed charge coverage falls below 1.5x on a sustained basis, including pro-rata share of joint ventures. Weakening operating performance, declining occupancy, difficulties selling assets and refinancing maturing mortgages and corporate debt at reasonable term, or a deterioration in liquidity could also precipitate a downgrade.
The ratings are unlikely to be upgraded given the negative outlook. Any upgrade would require a material reduction in leverage, and a strengthening of fixed charge coverage above 2.0x. Positive operating trends including improvement in occupancy and cash releasing spreads would also be necessary for an upgrade.
SL Green Realty Corp. (NYSE: SLG) is a real estate investment trust that owns, operates and acquires primarily commercial office properties in the Manhattan submarket of the New York metropolitan area. As of June 30, 2023, SL Green held interests in 60 buildings totaling 33.1 million square feet.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was REITs and Other Commercial Real Estate Firms published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393395. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
