Fitch Upgrades Waste Connections' LT IDR to 'A-'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - New York - 31 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded Waste Connection, Inc's (WCN) Long-Term (LT) Issuer Default Rating (IDR) and senior unsecured ratings to 'A-' from 'BBB+'. Fitch has also upgraded the senior unsecured credit facilities and notes to 'A-' from 'BBB+'. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Ratings Upgraded to 'A-': The upgrade reflects the waste industry and WCN's durable through-the-cycle business and cash flow profiles, as well as the demonstrated dedication to clear, consistent capital allocation and financial policies, representative of an 'A-' rating. These include the highly competitive barriers associated with its difficult-to-reproduce landfill network, consistent and regulatorily mandated need for solid waste disposal across substantially all sectors of the economy that limits volumetric risk, disciplined pricing behavior that preserves margins and FCF exhibited through business cycles, and diversified geographic footprint that moderates the impact of demographic shifts. WCN's through-the-cycle track record and resiliency support Fitch's current lower-risk cash flow profile assessment, which is also reflected in the updated leverage rating sensitivities.
WCN's performance track record through the pandemic, managing through a heightened inflationary environment, and moderating swings in recycled commodity prices have further demonstrated its essential service and inelastic price characteristics, as well as operational execution. WCN has continued to manage to clear financial policies including company-calculated leverage in the 2.5x-3.0x range and has retained strong financial flexibility via consistent FCF generation and maintenance of a balanced dividend and share repurchase plan.
Stable FCF Supports Financial Flexibility: The recurring demand fundamentals and contractual nature of WCN's services support a highly resilient cash flow profile, consistent with that of its main municipal solid waste (MSW) peers. Fitch projects EBITDA margins consistently in the low-30% range over the next few years, supporting FCF margins in the low-double digits. In a downturn scenario, Fitch believes WCN would have an ability to preserve its financial flexibility, primarily via reducing share repurchases.
Leverage Sustained Around Mid/High-2x: Fitch expects EBITDA leverage of about 2.8x at YE 2023, and that leverage remains in the high 2.5x-3.0x range going forward. This level is in line with similarly rated waste management, utility/midstream and railroad peers. While there could be modest deviations for large M&A, Fitch believes the company would prioritize returning to this leverage level, though the consolidated nature of the MSW industry likely limits the potential for large scale deals. Leverage going forward is likely to be effectively managed with share repurchases.
Waste Streams Provide Recurring Demand: WCN benefits from consistent demand fundamentals in residential and commercial solid waste production and a high degree of end-market and customer diversification. However, WCN also has exposure to relatively more cyclical end markets including recycled commodities (2% of gross revenue) and industrial-focused waste services (industrial & construction and E&P service gross revenue of about 17%). Fitch considers the solid waste industry to be fairly mature, allowing positive but slow industry growth. WCN enjoys a good degree of multi-year contracts and exclusive market revenue, which supports relatively low customer churn, around the mid-single digits, and pricing stability.
Industry-Leading Market Position: WCN is the third largest in terms of revenue and landfill network in the U.S. The network is protected by high costs to replicate in addition to regulatory and political barriers to establishing competing landfill operations. Competition is largely regional with the highest intensity generally focused in collection operations, particularly against small independent and municipal operators. WCN tends to focus in rural and secondary markets where it holds a leading market position, or franchise markets with exclusivity. To a lesser extent it provides services in urban areas that are typically more competitive. Competitive risks are moderated by its strong landfill network that supports good internalization rates in the mid-50s.
Oligopolistic Industry Supports Pricing: Pricing rationality of WCN and its large peers, which collectively account for a high proportion of the MSW market, is consistent because maintaining profitability is prioritized over aggressive volume growth. Fitch believes this industry characteristic has supported favorable developments including increasing focus on recouping cost inflation through indexing contracts to inflation measures and progress in converting recycling contracts to a risk-sharing model to mitigate earnings volatility driven by recycled commodity prices. MSW pricing growth has been consistently positive for WCN and its main peers, historically around the low-to-mid single digits, but is registering at the higher end in the current inflationary environment.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
Fitch compares WCN to other MSW firms, Waste Management, Inc. (WM; A-/Stable) and Republic Services, Inc. (RSG; A-/Stable), as well as large rail operator Union Pacific Corporation (UNP; A-/Stable) and midstream pipeline operator Colonial Enterprises, Inc (Colonial; A-/Stable). The three large MSW firms have similar business profile strengths, including entrenched market positions within their operating regions, similar demand profiles and service mix that drive a similar degree of cash flow stability through cycles, and track record of disciplined pricing that is supportive of sustaining and driving profitability.
Fitch believes the primary benefit to overall scale is geographic risk diversification given the fragmented customer base largely made up of municipalities or individual consumer/commercial customers. Fitch believes the three have a good degree of geographic spread across the U.S. Financial flexibility is also strong with FCF profiles and capital deployment policies that support the three MSW companies managing to 2.5x-3.0x leverage through the long-term.
Comparatively, UNP's rail network provides a relatively high degree of market position strength that supports stronger profitability, though this is weighed against inherently higher volume risk, and collectively moderate operating risks such as the presence of substitutive transport modes, potential regulatory burden, and challenges managing a heavily unionized workforce. The expectation that UNP's EBITDAR leverage remains at 3.0x anchors the strong business profile to the 'A-' rating. Pipeline operator Colonial's business profile benefits from its strong market position, including the largest refined products pipeline in the U.S., which connects low-cost supply to some of the largest demand centers in the U.S., supporting long-term visibility into stable cash flow generation. It also considers it single-asset risk and the expectation is that EBITDA leverage remains in the 3.0x-3.5x range.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
Fitch's Key Assumptions Within the Rating Case for the Issuer
--Total revenue growth of about 11% in FY2023 with about 5% organic growth and the remainder M&A contributions. Organic revenue growth around 3%-5%, supplemented low-single digit contributions from M&A;
--EBITDA margin in the low-30% range over the few years;
--Capex remains around 11% of revenue;
--WCN remains active in pursuing bolt-on acquisitions and shareholder distributions; however, its financial policies remain in place.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Commitment to a financial policy where EBITDA leverage is maintained below 2.5x;
--Adherence to a balanced capital allocation plan that preserves through-the-cycle financial flexibility;
--Continued execution of operational strategy that maintains margin and FCF stability through business cycles.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Deviation from its financial policy leading to EBITDA leverage sustained above 3.0x;
--A material shift in business mix that heightens variability in WCN's cash flow profile through business cycles;
--Material shift in capital allocation plan that reduces through-the-cycle financial flexibility.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Comfortable Liquidity: As of June 30, 2023, the WCN had $92 million of cash and $1.4 billion of availability under its $1.9 billion credit facility. WCN's next debt maturity is the revolver and $1.5 billion of term loan borrowings that mature in July 2026. WCN generally has a well-spread maturity schedule that spans through 2052. Fitch expects debt maturities will be refinanced. Fitch views WCN's consistent FCF generation, capital allocation policies, and strong access to capital markets as supportive of a strong liquidity profile, despite often managing with modest cash balances.
ISSUER PROFILE
WCN is the third-largest integrated municipal solid waste company in North America. The company collects, transports and disposes of non-hazardous waste across residential, commercial and industrial markets.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Waste Connections, Inc.
LT IDRA- Upgrade
BBB+ 
senior unsecured
LTA- Upgrade
BBB+ 
