Fitch Upgrades Jiangsu Fang Yang Group to 'BB'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - Hong Kong - 24 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded China-based Jiangsu Fang Yang Group Co., Ltd.'s (Fang Yang) Long-Term Foreign- and Local-Currency Issuer Default Ratings (IDR) to 'BB', from 'BB-'. The Outlook is Stable.
Fitch has also upgraded the rating on Fang Yang's USD150 million 5.3% senior unsecured notes due 2024 to 'BB', from 'BB-'. The notes were issued by Haichuan International Investment Co., Ltd., an indirectly and wholly owned subsidiary. The notes were unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by Fang Yang.
The upgrade follows Fitch's perception of stronger financial implications of a Fang Yang default, considering the company's enhanced public-function role in Lianyungang municipality relative to the city's other government-related entities (GREs) after major petrochemical complexes were put into production in the Lianyungang Xuwei New District (XND). Fang Yang's funding costs have reduced since 2021 thanks to its larger policy role and its established presence in capital markets.
The upgrade also factors in the company's highly policy-driven businesses, which account for a large portion of Lianyungang's overall GRE debt.
Fang Yang's upgrade reflects a higher support score of 22.5, from 17.5 previously, resulting in a switch to a "top-down" rating approach from our assessment of the Lianyungang municipality's creditworthiness. This reflects Fitch's view that Fang Yang has an important policy role in the urban development of XND.
XND is one of seven national petrochemical industry bases and allows Lianyungang municipality to play a role in national petrochemical strategies. Fitch therefore believes the municipal government has a strong incentive to provide extraordinary support to the company, if needed.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Status, Ownership and Control: 'Strong'
Fitch's assessment considers the Lianyungang municipality's 100% direct shareholding in Fang Yang, which reinforces the government's incentive to provide extraordinary support. The Lianyungang government delegates management and supervision of Fang Yang to the XND management committee, which has tight control and oversight of the company's operations and financial planning. Fitch believes that the delegation of the operations to the management committee makes the government less involved in Fang Yang's management, the main constraint against a higher assessment.
Support Track Record: 'Moderate'
The assessment reflects Fitch's view that Fang Yang has received direct financial support from the XND management committee. XND is under development and has weaker ability to provide regular and sizeable support to the company, which results in Fang Yang's financial profile remaining at a weaker level.
Fang Yang in 2022 received various forms of government support, including capital injections and operating subsidies, which totalled CNY860 million. In addition, the company benefits from its strategic importance in XND's development, and it expects to receive more government financial support as XND expands and there are no restrictions on government support, if needed.
Socio-Political Implications of Default: 'Moderate'
Fitch expects Fang Yang to remain as the sole GRE in driving XND's economic development in support of the municipality's plan to build high-end petrochemical industry clusters. However, disruption arising from the company's inability to carry out its policy role will probably be limited by its geographical concentration in XND. In addition, there may be other urban developers in Lianyungang that are potential substitutes for the company. Hence, the attribute assessment is not higher than 'Moderate'.
Financial Implications of Default: 'Strong'
Fitch raised the assessment to 'Strong' from 'Moderate' considering the company's improved capital-market access and larger policy function. It remains an active bond issuer and has well-established banking relationships, which are reflected in its long debt tenors and controllable funding cost. Its cost of borrowing has reduced relative to peers, underpinned by its enlarged functional role as the industries in XND develop.
Fitch views that there is high policy intensity in Fang Yang's major functional businesses, which are increasingly important to the municipality's economic growth. Its assets and debt obligations are larger than those of the city's other GREs. Fitch believes a failure of Fang Yang could disrupt the availability of financing for Lianyungang's other GREs. However, the potential contagion from a Fang Yang default is limited due to its geographical concentration.
Standalone Credit Profile
We assess Fang Yang's Standalone Credit Profile (SCP) at 'b' under our Public Sector, Revenue-Supported Entities Rating Criteria. Fang Yang's SCP reflects a combination of 'Midrange' revenue defensibility, 'Midrange' operating risk and a 'Weaker' financial profile.
Revenue Defensibility 'Midrange'
The 'Midrange' assessment considers Fang Yang's close business linkage with XND's economic development, which we expect has solid growth prospects. Revenue increased by 36% to CNY16.2 billion, driven by growth of 187% in the public service segment, which Fitch expects to continue to be the key revenue driver. However, the company has limited pricing power for urban construction as the government determines its fees. Pricing for Fang Yang's public services is settled under direction of the government.
Operating Risk 'Midrange'
Operating risk is assessed as 'Midrange', mainly driven by Fang Yang's well-identified cost structure with stable profit margin. The functional businesses, such as urban development, usually adopt a cost-plus model and cost fluctuations will be largely covered by the government. The company also has low risk in supply and neutral capital planning and management risk, as infrastructure construction largely follows XND's development blueprint.
Financial Profile 'Weaker'
The 'Weaker' assessment is due mainly to Fang Yang's high leverage. Fitch expects net leverage, measured by net debt/EBITDA, to continue rising to exceed 30x in next five years, with further capex investment in infrastructure projects and public works. Even so, we expect its balanced debt maturity profile and ample liquidity to mitigate the refinancing risk.
Derivation Summary
We assess Fang Yang under our Government-Related Entities Rating Criteria. The rating approach factors in the government's ownership, control and support record as well as the company's strategic importance in the urban development of XND, and the potential impact of a default.
Fang Yang's SCP is derived from our assessment of the company's revenue defensibility, operating risk and financial profile under our Public Sector, Revenue-Supported Entities Rating Criteria.
Debt Ratings
The USD150 million senior unsecured notes issued by Haichuan International Investment are rated at the same level as Fang Yang's Long-Term Foreign-Currency IDR. The notes constitute Fang Yang's unsecured and unsubordinated obligations, ranking pari passu with all its other present and future obligations.
Liquidity and Debt Structure
On consolidated level, Fang Yang had nearly CNY60 billion of total debt at end-2022. Its short-term debt accounted for 27% of total debt. Bank loans are the most important financing channel, which remained stable at 71% of total debt. In addition, the company has an adequate liquidity profile after factoring in its available liquidity relative to its short-term debt.
Issuer Profile
Fang Yang is the main infrastructure developer of XND. The company is responsible for urban development construction, affordable house, primary land development and provision of public services in XND to attract investments by enterprises. The company and XND are important to the municipality's development plan to build high-end petrochemical industry clusters to drive economic growth.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
- Deterioration in Fitch's credit view of Lianyungang municipality's ability to provide subsidies, grants or other legitimate sources allowed under China's policies and regulations.
- Weakening of Fang Yang' policy role or a dilution in the government's shareholding or control.
- A negative change in Fang Yang's IDRs would lead to similar action on its US dollar notes.
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
- An upward revision in Fitch's credit view of the Lianyungang municipality's ability to provide subsidies, grants or other legitimate sources allowed under China's policies and regulations.
- Expansion of the company's policy role that strengthens the municipality's incentive to provide support.
- A positive change in Fang Yang's IDRs would lead to similar action on its US dollar notes.
ESG Considerations
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
Best/Worst Case Rating Scenario
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
References for Substantially Material Source Cited as Key Driver Rating
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Jiangsu Fang Yang Group Co., Ltd.
LT IDRBB Upgrade
BB- 
LC LT IDRBB Upgrade
BB- 
Haichuan International Investment Co., Ltd.
   senior unsecured
LTBB Upgrade
BB- 
