Fitch Revises Dynasty Acquisition's (StandardAero) Outlook to Positive; Affirms Ratings

Fitch Ratings - New York - 11 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed Dynasty Acquisition Co. Inc.'s (StandardAero [SA]) 'B-' Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR). Fitch has also affirmed the company's ABL revolver at 'BB-'/'RR1', and first-lien secured revolver and first-lien term loan at 'B+'/'RR2'. The Rating Outlook has been revised to Positive from Stable.
The Positive Outlook reflects Fitch's view that SA's operations have stabilized emerging from the pandemic and long-term revenue visibility and stability is bolstered by the recent agreement to provide maintenance, repair & overhaul (MRO) services for the CFM LEAP engine.
Fitch additionally projects SA's credit metrics will continue to improve and sustain inside the company's positive sensitivities, ahead of previous expectations. Fitch forecasts EBITDA leverage will decline to around 6.0x by YE 2023 and could be in the mid-5x range by YE 2024, while EBITDA coverage will exceed 2.0x on a sustained basis beginning in late 2024 or early 2025.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
SA's ratings are supported by its strong market position, diversification and the high degree of regulation on aircraft maintenance, which is likely to increase over time. Revenue is also typically highly visible, which allows the company to manage working capital effectively. Fitch also projects FCF will return to positive territory beginning in 2024, as industry tailwinds drive revenue and EBITDA growth.
Rating concerns include the company's high, but improving leverage, along with the potential fragility of the cyclical aviation industry's recovery, particularly related to supply chain constraints. Airlines retiring older aircraft, which typically require much greater MRO services, is also a concern; however, Fitch incorporates steadily paced retirements into its forecasts.
Deleveraging Below 6.0x: Fitch forecasts SA's EBITDA leverage (debt/EBITDA) will steadily decline toward the mid-5.0x level by year-end 2024. The agency assigns a relatively high importance to the company's financial structure given the recent fragility of the aviation industry, although Fitch believes this concern is partially offset by the company's strategic profile, strong market position, and capacity to reduce debt over the next few years given its cash flow generation. Risks to deleveraging include potential debt-funded acquisitions, potentially terming out future ABL balances, failure to execute on outstanding contracts, or unforeseen periods of negative FCF.
Strong Market Position, Supported by Certifications: Fitch believes SA's market position is strong and defensible. It is one of the largest independent commercial aviation MRO companies in the world, and has longstanding relationships with the largest aerospace engine OEMs. Performing such work requires OEM authorizations and regulatory certifications -- one for each engine program -- that are expensive and take a significant amount of time for new entrants to acquire.
Fitch believes the company's wide range of program certifications and strong OEM relationships are major differentiators compared with peers and creates a defensible barrier against competition. Most of SA's contracts span more than 10 years and often last through the life of an engine. When the contacts come up for re-negotiation, SA has been able to retain all of its contracts due to the company's consistent execution and longstanding customer relationships.
LEAP Award: SA recently was awarded a contract to perform MRO services for CFM's LEAP engine, which the company anticipates will be the largest contract in SA's history. Fitch believes the LEAP engine strongly supports SA's Positive Outlook, providing revenue visibility, growth and stability. The engine will remain in service over the next several decades on two of the largest and growing aircraft programs, Boeing's (BBB-/Stable) 737MAX aircraft and Airbus's (A-/Stable) A320neo family, as well as Comac's C919.
Fitch does not anticipate the program will represent a significant portion of SA's total revenue until around 2025, but will quickly become and remain its largest program through at least the end of the current decade.
Positive FCF in 2024: Fitch projects SA will generate positive FCF over the next three to four years on average despite a recent drag from working capital fluctuations and meaningful investment to service the LEAP engine program over the next few years. As revenue and EBITDA continue to grow in 2024 and beyond, these working capital flows and capex investment should normalize, reducing the headwind to positive FCF.
Predictable Revenue: SA's ratings are supported by its predictable revenue during a normal operating environment due to highly regulated aircraft and engine maintenance requirements. While this visibility was temporarily disrupted during the pandemic due to airlines taking a significant portion of their fleets out of service and delaying external maintenance by utilizing a greater proportion of spares, overall visibility on customers' needs has improved materially since mid-2020.
Contract and Geographic Diversification: Fitch believes diversification across programs, geography and end markets further reduces the risks arising from a loss of any individual contract. The company estimates it has a top three market share on more than a dozen of the world's largest engine programs, including the CF34 and PW 100/150, which should continue to grow over the next several years. Expansion into the LEAP program has further bolstered the company's position.
Execution Risk: Fitch believes continued operational execution is a priority for SA. Fitch expects instances of poor execution would likely diminish the company's currently strong reputation and could result in customers switching to SA's competitors. Mitigating this risk is the fact that SA does not have a history of material contract cancellations over the past several years and has a very experienced management team, which Fitch believes would be capable of navigating potential challenges.
Customer Concentration Enhances Execution Risk: Fitch believes significant customer loss is unlikely in the near term, though the potential future risk is amplified by the company's degree of customer concentration, despite its diversified portfolio of contracts and certifications. Fitch estimates around 40% of revenue is derived from the company's top four customers. The agency expects this proportion will change over the next several years as the LEAP engine program becomes a more prominent proportion of overall revenue, but will remain a modest watch item over time.
Supplemental Acquisitions: Fitch expects SA will continue to supplement organic growth with incremental bolt-on acquisitions, in line with its strategy over the past few years. Fitch believes the company will be able to partially fund future purchases with internally generated cash, but could incur additional debt for larger transactions. Fitch believes the company could pursue tactical transactions to acquire additional certifications or improve diversification over time.
The company has historically drawn on its ABL facility to fund transactions, and the facility could remain a funding source depending on the magnitude of the transactions, though Fitch anticipates it would subsequently repay those shorter-term borrowings.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
The rating and Positive Outlook are supported by the company's lesser degree of cyclicality compared with OEs, and its stable and predictable revenue stream, which Fitch considers strong for the rating. The company's leverage and financial structure are important factors to the rating, and have begun to improve towards historical levels since mid-2020. The company's leading market position was also a consideration in deriving the rating, and is reinforced by the company's portfolio of certifications and diversification. SA is well positioned as the largest independent MRO provider in the world, although competition exists from OEMs and inhouse airline MRO operations. No country ceiling, parent/subsidiary linkage or operating environment factors were in effect for these ratings.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
Fitch's Key Assumptions Within the Rating Case for the Issuer:
--Revenue continues to grow by double digits per year between 2023 and 2025 as air traffic and flight capacity improves; Fitch also assumes modest revenue increase from LEAP engine work beginning in 2024-2025;
--EBITDA margins remain relatively steady, with labor and supply chain costs offset by benefit from scale and operational efficiencies;
--Cash outflows from working capital continues as the company builds inventory back up to meet demand and revenue growth;
--Capex increases in 2023 and 2024 as a result of growth investment for the LEAP engine platform, but declines towards 1.0% and 1.5% of revenue over the next few years;
--Debt repayment includes scheduled amortization over the forecasted period and ABL paydown by YE 2024;
--Modest incremental acquisitions are possible, but not explicitly assumed; small purchases between $30 million and $50 million would be funded with cash from balance sheet or temporary ABL draw; larger transactions would require incremental debt;
--No dividends are projected in Fitch's forecasts.
Recovery Assumptions
The recovery analysis assumes that SA would be considered a going-concern in bankruptcy and that the company would be reorganized rather than liquidated. A 10% administrative claim is assumed in the recovery analysis.
Fitch assumes $410 million as the going-concern EBITDA in the analysis. The agency's assumption represents a reasonable going-concern expectation upon emergence from a hypothetical bankruptcy following severe distress similar to the effect of the pandemic on the aviation industry.
In Fitch's recovery analysis, the agency assumes the catalyst for a restructuring would likely be liquidity/refinancing issues stemming in part to temporary deterioration in the business that would recover post-emergence. However, other scenarios could contribute to the company's significant deterioration, including one or more of the following: poor contract execution causes several periods of significant cash outflows and a materially negative hit to the company's reputation; or the company incurs significant cash costs resulting from failure to integrate one or more acquisitions.
Fitch assumes SA will receive a going-concern recovery multiple of 6.5x EBITDA under this scenario. Fitch considers this multiple to be toward the upper middle range of recovery multiples assigned to companies in the Aerospace & Defense sector.
Fitch's recovery assumptions are based on SA's industry-leading reputation, variable cost structure, solid and predictable backlog, diversified contract and certification portfolio, strong market position, and high industry barriers to entry. Each of these factors would likely support the company's ability to recover from severe distress in the case of hypothetical bankruptcy. Fitch also considered the meaningful execution risk and potential for cost overruns, though unlikely. Most of the defaulters in the Aerospace & Defense sector observed by Fitch in recent bankruptcy case studies were smaller in scale, had less diversified product lines or customer bases and were operating with highly leveraged capital structures.
Fitch generally assumes a fully drawn first lien revolver in its recovery analyses since credit revolvers are tapped as companies are under distress. Fitch assumed the company's $400 million ABL revolver was 85% drawn, which demonstrates the contraction of the borrowing base as a company becomes distressed. This is in line with other examples observed in bankruptcy studies.
The 'BB-' rating and Recovery Rating of 'RR1' on the ABL revolver are based on Fitch's recovery analysis under a going-concern scenario, which indicates outstanding recovery prospects. The 'B+' rating and Recovery Rating of 'RR2' on the company's first lien term loan and senior secured revolver would indicate strong recovery prospects for the credit facility.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--EBITDA leverage (total debt/EBITDA) around or below 6.0x for a sustained period, coupled with a corresponding financial policy by management to maintain these levels;
--Structural improvement in the aviation market contributes to sustained positive FCF;
--EBITDA interest coverage ratio greater than 2.0x over a sustained period.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Material contract cancellations caused by weakened reputation or inability to secure certifications on future engine programs;
--Sustained negative FCF or weakened liquidity position, which could include greater than 50% draw on its ABL facility;
--EBITDA interest coverage ratio less than 1.5x over a sustained period.
Fitch could stabilize SA's outlook over the next 12 to 24 months if the company experiences significant operational issues or a change in financial policy which leads to slower deleveraging than Fitch expects in its rating case, resulting in EBITDA leverage remaining above 6.0x, EBITDA interest coverage below 2.0x and neutral-to-negative FCF generation.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Liquidity: Fitch believes that SA's liquidity will fluctuate between $400 million and $600 million over the rating horizon, comprised of between $45 million and $150 million in cash, as well as a combination of availability under its ABL facility and revolving credit facility. Liquidity, along with internally generated cash, should be sufficient to cover near term expenses such as working capital growth, debt amortization and capex. The company's capital structure includes a senior secured ABL facility, senior first lien revolver and senior first lien term loan B. The company also has private unsecured notes.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Dynasty Acquisition Co., Inc. has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Financial Transparency due to the timing and disclosure of financial statements, which could have a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the ratings in conjunction with other factors.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
ISSUER PROFILE
StandardAero, Inc. is the world's largest independent provider of maintenance, repair and overhaul (MRO) services for the commercial, business jet, and military aviation markets.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
RECOVERY  
PRIOR  
Dynasty Acquisition Co., Inc.
LT IDRB- Affirmed


B- 
senior secured
LTB+ Affirmed
RR2

B+ 
senior secured
LTBB- Affirmed
RR1

BB- 
