Fitch Upgrades Bradseg's IDR to 'BB+'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - Rio de Janeiro - 08 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded the Long-Term Local Currency Issuer Default Ratings (IDR) of Bradseg Participações S.A. (Bradseg) to 'BB+' from 'BB'. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
The upgrade of Bradseg's rating reflects Fitch's action on the Local Currency Long-Term IDR of its parent company, Banco Bradesco S.A. (Bradesco, Long-Term Local Currency IDR 'BB+'/Stable) following the upgrade of Brazil's sovereign ratings.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Support-Driven Ratings: Bradseg's IDRs are aligned with the ratings of its parent, Bradesco. The Outlook for Bradseg's IDR mirrors Bradesco's, which is one notch above Brazil's sovereign ratings (BB/Stable). Fitch has upgraded Bradesco's IDRs to 'BB+', which are now one notch above the sovereign level, reflecting their fairly diversified and very strong credit profile; their historical resilience, performing as a safe haven in periods of economic uncertainty; and the significant role the bank play in the Brazilian financial system.
Core Subsidiary: Fitch considers BradSeg a core subsidiary of Bradesco. This reflects the strategic importance of its insurance operations, common branding and BradSeg's high contribution to group profits, with an average of 27.1% from 2019 through 2022.
Robust Market Position: The rating also reflects the company's leading position, consistent performance and diversified revenue base. Bradseg had a leading position and overall market share of approximately 22.5% as of September 2022. The rating also consider the company's strong distribution capacity, underpinned by the wide branch network of its parent, good performance and comfortable capitalization ratios.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Bradseg' IDR has limited upside potential, as it is equalized to that of Banco Bradesco, the ratings of which are constrained by its operating environment. Over the medium term, the ratings could benefit from stabilization and eventual improvement of Fitch's assessment of the operating environment for Brazilian banks.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Bradseg' rating are linked to that of Banco Bradesco. Therefore, any negative change in the bank's ratings would affect Bradseg's ratings, as would a change in its willingness to provide support, which Fitch considers highly unlikely.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Financial Institutions and Covered Bond issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
PUBLIC RATINGS WITH CREDIT LINKAGE TO OTHER RATINGS
Bradseg's rating is directly linked to the IDR of Banco Bradesco, the ultimate parent company.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Bradseg Participacoes S.A.
LC LT IDRBB+ Upgrade
BB 
