Fitch Upgrades Georgia Power to 'BBB+'; Outlook Positive; Revises Southern's Outlook to Stable

Fitch Ratings - New York - 01 Sep 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded Georgia Power Company's (Georgia Power) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'BBB+' from 'BBB' and assigned a Positive Rating Outlook. Fitch has also affirmed The Southern Company's Long-Term IDR at 'BBB+' and its Short-Term IDR at 'F2'. The Outlook has been revised to Stable from Negative.
Fitch has also affirmed the IDRs for Alabama Power Company (A/F1), Mississippi Power Company (BBB+/F2), Southern Power Company (BBB+/F2), Southern Company Gas (BBB+), Southern Company Gas Capital Corporation (senior unsecured notes at BBB+/F2), Atlanta Gas Light Company (BBB+), Nicor Gas (A/F1), Southern Electric Generating Company (A) and Southern Company Funding Corp (commercial paper at F2).
The Outlooks for Alabama Power, Southern Power, Nicor Gas and Southern Electric Generating Company have been revised to Stable from Negative due to rating linkages with the parent company. The Outlooks for Mississippi Power, Southern Company Gas and Atlanta Gas Light are maintained at Stable.
Georgia Power's rating upgrade is driven by the successful commercial operation of Vogtle Unit 3. The unit was placed into service on July 31, 2023 and has been operating at an average capacity factor of 85%. The upgrade also reflects a constructive stipulated agreement entered into by Georgia Power with the Public Interest Advocacy Staff of Georgia Public Service Commission (PSC) and key intervenors in the prudency review that allows Georgia Power to recover $7.562 billion of capital costs and $1.02 billion of capitalized financing costs and other costs associated with the construction of the two Vogtle units.
Fitch plans to resolve the Positive Outlook for Georgia Power after Unit 4 achieves commercial operations, currently expected by the end of first quarter 2024, and performance of the two new nuclear units is in line with expectations.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Key Rating Drivers for The Southern Company
Revision to Stable Outlook: The Southern Company's revised Outlook to Stable from Negative reflects Fitch's expectations of material improvement in the company's leverage metrics following a successful completion of Vogtle Unit 3 and a constructive stipulation agreement with the Georgia PSC Staff and key intervenors on the prudency filing. If the stipulation is approved by Georgia PSC, upon Vogtle Unit 4 achieving in-service, the annual retail revenues for Georgia Power will increase by $729 million, which will be supportive for both Georgia Power's and consolidated Southern Company's credit metrics.
Georgia Power has already implemented a rate increase of $230 million, effective Aug. 1, 2023, to reflect Vogtle Unit 3 in retail rate base. Vogtle Unit 4 remains on track to be in-service by the end of 1Q 2024. Fitch expects Southern Company's FFO leverage to improve to 4.7x in 2024 and remain below the rating threshold of 5.0x over Fitch's forecast period of 2023-2025.
Path to Deferred Fuel Under-Recovery: All of Southern Company's utility operating subsidiaries are able to recover the fuel and purchased power costs dollar for dollar. Typically, each operating subsidiary estimates its fuel costs in the fall of the prior year and monitors the under- and over-recovered balances to determine when adjustment to billing rates are required. Given the sharp run up in natural gas and power prices in 2022, Georgia Power's under-recovered fuel costs reached $2.6 billion as of May 2023. This negatively impacted Southern Company's consolidated credit metrics. Georgia Power has received Georgia PSC approval for a three -year recovery of the deferred fuel costs beginning June 1, 2023, which should lead to gradual improvement in credit metrics.
Improving Business Profile: The rating affirmation and Stable Outlook for Southern Company reflect a predominantly regulated business profile and conservative management of its non-regulated subsidiary, Southern Power. Commercial operation of Vogtle Unit 3 has significantly reduced the project completion risk for Georgia Power, its largest subsidiary. Southern Company's utility subsidiaries operate in constructive regulatory environments and exhibit generally stable earning profiles. Approximately 97% of the projected consolidated capex spend, excluding new Vogtle units, is directed towards its regulated utility subsidiaries.
Continued Strength in Retail Sales: Southern Company's utility subsidiaries continue to see robust weather-adjusted retail sales growth reflecting a strong economic rebound after the pandemic-induced downturn and resilient residential sales. The regulated subsidiaries continue to benefit from customer net in-migration as their service territories continue to attract new businesses and a growing labor market. For the first half of 2023, weather-adjusted residential and commercial sales increased by 0.5% and 1.5%, respectively compared to the year ago quarter. Industrial sales decreased by 2.0%.
Modest Impact from IRA: Based on an initial review, Southern Company expects a very modest negative impact from the potential 15% minimum corporate tax provision of the Inflation Reduction Act. This is driven by the ability to utilize accelerated deprecation to calculate the minimum corporate tax as well as the use of renewable tax credits to offset up to 75% of the cash tax payment.
Parent Subsidiary Linkages: There is parent subsidiary linkage between Southern Company and all of its rated subsidiaries. Fitch determines Southern Company's standalone credit profile (SCP) based upon consolidated metrics. Fitch considers Alabama Power, Mississippi Power, Southern Company Gas and Nicor Gas to have SCPs stronger than Southern Company. As such, Fitch has followed the stronger subsidiary path. Emphasis is placed on the subsidiaries' status as regulated entities. Legal ring fencing is considered porous for Alabama Power, Mississippi Power and Nicor Gas given the general protections afforded by economic regulation.
Legal ring fencing is considered Open for Southern Company Gas. Access and control for all four is evaluated as porous. Southern Company's philosophy regarding financing & cross affiliate support is that each operating company and Southern Power issues its own debt and preferred securities which are non-recourse to the parent.
Due to the aforementioned linkage considerations, Fitch will limit the difference between Southern Company and its any of its higher rated regulated subsidiaries to two notches. Fitch will limit the difference between Southern Company and Southern Company Gas to one notch.
Southern Power is considered to have a weaker SCP than Southern Company. Fitch has followed the stronger parent path. Legal incentives are weak as Southern Company does not guarantee debt of Southern Power. Strategic incentives are scored as Medium and Operational incentives are scored as Weak. As a result of this assessment, Fitch has applied a one notch uplift to Southern Power's ratings. Fitch views the SCP of Georgia Power to be the same as that of Southern Company
Key Rating Drivers for Alabama Power Company
Supportive Regulation: Fitch views Alabama regulation as constructive. Cost-of-service recovery mechanisms provide timely recovery of all prudent costs through various rates/cost trackers, such as those incurred for fuel, purchased power, storm costs, environmental expenditures, federal mandates and new generation facilities. The rate stabilization and equalization (RSE) rates are set based on a weighted cost of equity (WCE) range of 5.75%-6.15%. For the year 2022, Alabama Power's WCE range was above the authorized resulting in refunds to customers beginning August 2023.
Recovery in Sales: Alabama Power's sales have continued to recover after suffering a modest pandemic-related financial impact in 2020. In addition, the state has been successful in attracting heavy manufacturing industry such as automotive, primary metals, chemicals and aerospace, among others, which is positive for electricity sales. In the first half of 2023, weather-adjusted commercial sales increased by 0.6% over the corresponding period of 2022 and weather-adjusted residential kWh sales increased by 0.6% led by customer growth. Industrial sales decreased by 3.4% in the first half of 2023 due to decline in chemicals and forest products sectors.
Alabama Power has relatively higher level of customer concentration given its reliance on the industrial sector, which made up approximately 30% of its total 2022 MWh sales. However, this concentration has declined in recent years. As a proportion of revenue, industrial sales comprised approximately 24% of the total.
Expansion of Generation Capacity: Alabama Power is constructing a 720MW combined-cycle natural gas facility which it expects to be in service by November 2023. The Alabama PSC authorized the recovery of the construction costs up to 5% above the estimated build cost of $652 million. While Alabama Power has the ability to seek recovery of additional costs, and Fitch expects the utility to take measures to complete construction of the plant within the recoverable amount, the unprecedented soft cap utilized by the PSC is a modest concern. Alabama Power completed the acquisition of Calhoun Generating Station, a 743MW natural gas fired combustion turbine facility, in September 2022.
Improving Credit Metrics: Fitch expects Alabama Power's FFO leverage to average approximately 3.6x over 2023-2025, which is in line with 'A' rated utilities. FFO fixed-charge coverage is expected to range between 7.0x and 7.5x over 2023-2025.
High Proportion of Coal in Fuel Mix: A large coal mix (approximately 40% of total generation) leaves the utility exposed to potentially higher environmental expenditures, such as those related to coal ash. Through 2026, Alabama Power projects to spend approximately $195 million in environmental-related capex and approximately $1.3 billion in costs associated with the closure and monitoring of ash ponds and landfills.
To comply with the Effluent Limitation Guidelines promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency, Alabama Power plans to retire 1.2GW of coal units (including its 50% ownership of Southern Electric Generating Company) and convert 1.23GW of coal units to natural gas before the compliance date of Dec. 31, 2028. The net book value of these coal plants (approximately $1.4 billion), as well as costs associated with site removal and closure, is expected to be recovered through Rate CNP Compliance clause, which allows for recovery of all prudently incurred and federally mandated costs.
Key Rating Drivers for Georgia Power Company
Vogtle Risks Abating: With the commercial operation of Vogtle Unit 3 and as expected performance of the unit thus far, the execution risk associated with the construction of two new nuclear units is materially reduced for Georgia Power. The construction of Unit 4 continues to benefit from lessons learned on Unit 3. Based on the most recent forecasts, Georgia Power's share of the capital costs for the two units currently stands at $10.6 billion and Unit 4 is on track to reach commercial operation in 1Q24.
Positive Resolution of Prudence Review: Consistent with the 2017 Georgia PSC Order and Unit 4 completing fuel load, Georgia Power filed an application on Aug. 30, 2023 to seek recovery of all prudently incurred capital costs for Vogtle Units 3 and 4. On the same day, the Georgia PSC Staff filed a stipulated agreement with Georgia Power and key intervenors that provides for recovery of $7.562 billion of capital costs. This is lower than the company's ask of $8.826 billion but modestly higher than $7.3 billion, which was deemed reasonable by the PSC in its 2017 Order. Georgia Power will also be allowed to recover $1.02 billion of additional costs, which include capitalized financing costs. New rates will be effective the month following commercial operations of Unit 4.
The stipulation also induces ongoing risks for Georgia Power in case the in-service date of Unit 4 is delayed beyond March 31, 2024, and the operating performance of Units 3 and 4 is below expected performance until the units' first refueling outage. However, Fitch sees these risks as a manageable for Georgia Power's 'BBB+' rating profile, especially given Unit 3's operating performance to date.
Constructive Resolution of Co-Owners Dispute: Fitch views the settlement Georgia Power reached with Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG) in September 2022 regarding the dispute over cost sharing and tendering provisions as constructive. Under the terms of the settlement, MEAG will not exercise its tender option and retain the full ownership interest in Vogtle 3 and 4 units. Georgia Power will pay MEAG $75 million to reflect the cost-sharing provision based on current capital cost forecast. For costs above the current forecasts, Georgia Power will bear 20% of MEAG's costs with no further adjustment for force majeure costs. Georgia Power and MEAG also agreed to dismiss the pending litigation between the two parties. This settlement does not have any impact on the ongoing litigation proceedings with the other two co-owners, Oglethorpe Power Corporation and the City of Dalton. Both co-owners have exercised their tender options.
Georgia Power has recorded $407 million of pretax charges to date associated with the cost sharing and tender provisions with the co-owners. It may have to bear an additional $345 million of costs under the co-owners' interpretation of sharing and tender provisions based on the current estimated project costs. Georgia Power will not be able to recover these incremental costs from retail customers.
Go/No Go Vote: The prudency filing by Georgia Power has triggered a project adverse event under the amended co-owners' agreement, which requires the holders of at least 90% of the ownership interests in Vogtle units 3 and 4 to vote within 15 business days to continue the construction of Unit 4. Georgia Power and MEAG have voted to continue the construction of the project. Fitch assumes that the other co-owners will also vote in favor of continuing the construction of Unit 4 given how close the unit is to achieving commercial operations. However, even in the worst case that Georgia Power is not able to get the requisite co-owners' vote to continue construction, the financial implications are manageable within Georgia Power's current rating.
Constructive Rate Order: Georgia Power received a constructive outcome in its 2022 base rate case, which provided for base rate increases of $216 million, $377 million, and $403 million effective January 1 of 2023, 2024 and 2025, respectively. The proposed rate increases are based on a retail ROE midpoint of 10.5% with a ROE range of 9.5%-11.9% and equity ratio of 56%. For earnings above 11.9% retail ROE, 40% will be applied to accelerated write-down of regulatory assets, 40% will be refunded to customers and 20% retained by Georgia Power.
Financial Metrics to Strengthen: Georgia Power's FFO leverage weakened in 2022 to 6.8x largely driven by $2.1 billion of under-recovered fuel balance as of Dec. 31, 2022. Georgia Power will recover the deferred fuel costs of $2.6 billion (as of May 2023) over a three-year period beginning June 1, 2023. This, along with base rate increases in accordance with the December 2022 rate order and the stipulation reached on prudency filing, should lead to an improvement in Georgia Power's leverage metrics. Fitch expects FFO leverage to improve to mid-3.0x by 2024.
Robust Sales Growth: Electricity sales in Georgia Power's service territory have recovered well, reaching pre-pandemic levels in 2022. Georgia economy continues to perform well benefiting from strong population growth and a favorable business climate. Weather-adjusted residential and commercial sales increased by 0.5% and 1.5%, respectively, in the first half of 2023 compared with the comparable period in 2022. However, industrial sales have begun to weaken, especially in certain sectors such as textiles and rubber. During the first half of 2023, weather-adjusted industrial sales decreased by 0.8% when compared to the corresponding period in 2022.
Key Rating Drivers for Mississippi Power Company
Stable Regulatory Environment: The regulatory environment for Mississippi Power has improved substantially with a resolution of all issues related to the cancelled Kemper power plant. Mississippi Power's last rate case was resolved in March 2020, which was a result of a stipulation reached with the Utility Staff and authorized rates based on 10% ROE and 53% equity ratio with an allowed maximum equity ratio of 55% by the end of 2020. Mississippi Power does not anticipate filing another rate case in the foreseeable future and base rates will be evaluated in annual Performance Evaluation Plan (PEP) filings going forward. In 2022, the Mississippi Power achieved a 9.27% ROE excluding $11.6 million Kemper related charges. Mississippi Power has not requested PEP increase in 2023.
Retirement of Coal Plants: Mississippi Power is planning to retire Plant Watson Unit 4 in December 2023 and its 40% ownership interest in Plant Greene County Units 1 and 2 by 2025 and 2026, respectively. These retirements, which together constitute 474 MWs, are consistent with each units' remaining useful life. Mississippi Power is also planning to retire its 50% ownership interest in Plant Daniel Units 1 and 2 (502 MWs) by the end of 2027.
The remaining net book value of Plant Daniel Units 1 and 2 was approximately $499 million at Dec. 31, 2022 and Mississippi Power is continuing to depreciate these units using the current approved rates through the end of 2027. Mississippi Power expects to reclassify the net book value remaining at retirement, which is expected to total approximately $397 million, to a regulatory asset to be amortized over a period to be determined by the Mississippi PSC in future proceedings, consistent with a 2020 PSC order. The Plant Watson and Greene County units are expected to be fully depreciated upon retirement.
Modest Decline in Sales: Fitch expects total electricity sales at Mississippi Power to modestly decline over Fitch's forecast period driven by a decrease in wholesale sales, per a shared service agreement with Cooperative Energy, that will more than offset growth in retail sales. Sales across all retail classes have rebounded from pandemic lows and are currently tracking close to pre-pandemic levels.
Weather-adjusted commercial sales increased by 1.4% during 2022 as compared to 2021. Industrial sales increased by 1.6%. Weather-adjusted residential sales decreased by 1.8%. In the first half of 2023, weather-adjusted residential sales decreased by 1.0% compared with the same period in 2022 due to decline in customer usage. Weather-adjusted commercial sales increased 2.9% while industrial sales increased by 1.4%.
Robust in Credit Metrics: Fitch expects Mississippi Power's FFO leverage to be between 4.0x-4.5x in 2023-2025, consistent with 'BBB+' utility peers. Fitch expects the FFO coverage ratio to be above 6.5x over 2023-2025.
Key Rating Drivers for Southern Power Company
Supportive Contracting Strategy: Southern Power's ratings are underpinned by its conservative contracting strategy. The company sells power primarily under long-term power sales agreements with investment-grade counterparties. As of June 30, 2023, the company had an average investment coverage ratio of 96% through 2027 and 90% through 2032, with average contract duration of approximately 12 years.
Southern Power is generally able to pass through fuel costs to customers under power sales contracts for its natural gas generation assets, although it retains margin exposure to its plants' operating efficiency. For renewable generation projects, the company retains modest volumetric risks associated with resource variability.
Limited Volumetric Risk: A vast majority of its generation portfolio is under long-term power purchase agreements (PPAs) with primarily strong creditworthy counterparties. The solar and wind PPAs carry modest volumetric risks. A large part of the economics for the natural gas PPAs is derived from capacity payments, thereby minimizing volumetric risk. The company has also not experienced any significant supply chain issues nor any interruptions in its construction activities.
In-line Leverage Ratios: Fitch expects Southern Power's FFO leverage and FFO fixed-charge coverage to be between 3.0x-4.0x and 5.0x-5.5x, respectively, over 2023-2025. This reflects only committed growth projects. Southern Power has budgeted for $500 million as placeholder capex for currently unidentified projects in 2023 and $750 million in 2024 and 2025. A moderate pace of growth capex and the potential use of third-party tax equity and tax credit transferability could allow Southern Power to continue to generate FCF and direct a portion toward debt reduction. As of Dec. 31, 2022, Southern Company and Southern Power had approximately $1.1 billion of unused federal renewable tax credits, which are currently expected to be fully utilized by 2026.
Cleaner Fuel Mix: Southern Power is well positioned relative to other power generators with respect to environmental attributes. Its fleet of modern gas-fired power plants and portfolio of renewable generation projects comprise the bulk of its generation portfolio. Fitch expects Southern Power to continue to benefit from the potential retirement of old and inefficient coal capacity in its markets.
Key Rating Drivers for Southern Company Gas
Supportive Regulation: GAS's four local distribution companies (LDC) operate in states with a constructive regulatory framework. Fitch estimates the combined rate base in Illinois and Georgia accounted for over 85% of the LDC rate base at YE 2022. All four LDCs have full recovery of natural gas costs through adjustment mechanisms and are allowed different forms of revenue decoupling or normalization. Illinois and Virginia have riders and infrastructure programs that allow recovery with minimal lag. Illinois gas rates have been decoupled since October 2019 for residential customers based on customer class.
Investments under Georgia's Strategic Infrastructure Development and Enhancement program are being recovered through the Georgia Rate Adjustment Mechanism (GRAM), which adjusts rates annually based on forward test-year projections. These mechanisms mitigate regulatory lag and provide a reasonable opportunity for gas utilities to earn their authorized returns. ROEs, or midpoint ROE ranges, are between 9.5%-9.8%, except in Georgia, where the midpoint authorized ROE is 10.25%.
Pending Regulatory Proceedings: Other than the pending rate case at Nicor Gas, Virginia Natural Gas has a pending rate case. On Aug. 1, 2022, Virginia Natural Gas filed a base rate increase request of $69.3 million, which includes $15 million of revenue that will transfer from existing rider recovery into base rates. The request reflects a 10.35% ROE and a 53.2% equity ratio. Interim rates, which are subject to refund and effective Jan. 1, 2023, will remain in place until the Virginia State Corporation Commission issues its final order in this case, of which there is no statutory time limit to issue.
Large Capex: GAS's capex is estimated to be approximately $1.7 billion per year over Fitch's forecast period of 2023-2025. Almost all of this capex will be invested in LDCs primarily expected to be recovered through rider or regulatory mechanisms, thereby growing rate base by a 10% CAGR over the next three years, which Fitch views favorably. Gas pipeline replacement and improvement, driven by increased federal and safety requirements, comprises 65% of the utility spending, with the remaining related to customer growth and maintenance and other.
Reduced Exposure to Non-Regulated Segments: GAS sold Sequent, which provided wholesale natural gas marketing and logistics services, to Williams Companies in 2021. Post the divestiture of Sequent, natural gas pipeline investments and gas marketing services make up the majority of the non-regulated segment. Gas pipeline investments include 50% interest in Southern Natural Gas, which is the largest asset. Other pipeline investments include 100% ownership in Magnolia pipeline and 50% ownership in Dalton and Horizon pipelines. GAS's ratings incorporate Fitch's assumption that the company will predominantly focus on its regulated operations and long-term contracted gas pipeline investments.
Elevated Credit Metrics: Fitch expects GAS' FFO leverage to remain approximately 5.0x over Fitch's forecast period of 2023-2025. Fitch expects FFO fixed charge cover to be between 5.0x-5.5x during this time.
Key Rating Drivers for Atlanta Gas Light Company
Parent Rating Linkage: Atlanta Gas Light's IDR mirrors GAS's primarily due to their close linkage. The utility relies on GAS for access to capital and liquidity. Atlanta Gas Light and other subsidiaries, except for Nicor Gas, participate in a corporate money pool for short-term borrowing needs. Intercompany loans represent over 80% of Atlanta Gas Light's total long-term debt. Georgia regulation does not limit Atlanta Gas Light's ability to upstream dividends to GAS.
Supportive Regulation: Atlanta Gas Light operates under volume-insensitive straight fixed-variable rates. Changes in customer usage due to weather and improvements in equipment efficiencies have relatively small financial impact. The utility also benefits from other constructive regulations, including pre-approval and rider recovery for infrastructure investments.
On December 20, 2022, the Georgia PSC approved Atlanta Gas Light's annual GRAM filing, which resulted in an annual rate increase of $53 million effective Jan. 1, 2023. Atlanta Gas Light's first Integrated Capacity and Delivery Plan (i-CDP) was approved in November 2021 to reflect proposed investments in pipeline safety, reliability and growth programs for the period 2022-2031. A new System Reinforcement Rider of $7 million was approved for 2022-2024. The order also provided for $1.7 billion of total capital investment for the years 2022 through 2024.
Key Rating Drivers for Nicor Gas Company
Stable Utility Operations: Nicor Gas' utility operations are supported by a large and mostly residential customer base, a monthly purchased gas adjustment (PGA) mechanism, bad debt rider, infrastructure improvement rider, a diverse source of gas supply and 150 billion cubic feet (Bcf) of gas storage. While Nicor Gas' rates are not fully decoupled, its last rate order authorized the recovery of ~70% of fixed costs in the fixed-customer charge, up from 60% in previous rates. As Nicor Gas' earnings are not insulated from weather impact, the company has used weather derivatives to partially offset lower operating margin from warmer than normal weather while retaining the upside should the weather become colder than normal.
Pending Regulatory Proceeding: On Jan. 3, 2023, Nicor Gas filed a general base rate case with the Illinois Commerce Commission (ICC) requesting a $321 million increase in annual base rate revenues, including $59 million related to the recovery of investments under the 'Investing in Illinois' program through Dec. 31, 2023. The requested increase is based on a projected test year for the 12-month period ending Dec. 31, 2024, a return on equity of 10.35%, and an equity ratio of 54.5%.
Further, Nicor Gas is seeking to recover an additional $32 million under three proposed riders related to recovery of vehicle fuel costs, company use gas, and customer payment fees. The ICC Staff, while not supportive of company's request for the three riders, has recommended a $256 million rate increase based upon 50% equity ratio and 9.89% ROE. The ICC is expected to issue a final order in November 2023.
Fitch is expecting a constructive resolution of the aforementioned rate case, the outcome of which is material to Nicor Gas' 'A' rating. Fitch is somewhat concerned with ICC's June order that disallowed $32 million of the $415 million that Nicor Gas requested as Qualifying Infrastructure Plan (QIP) investments for the year 2019. Nicor Gas has appealed this decision. The proceedings to review Nicor Gas' QIP investments for years 2020, 2021 and 2022 are pending before ICC and these investments total $389 million, $408 million and $437 million, respectively. Furthermore, the Investing in Illinois program, which provides a rider recovery for investments in pipe replacements among other investments, sunsets in 2023 and it is not clear yet what regulatory construct would replace the program.
Improving Credit Metrics: Nicor Gas' financial metrics had weakened considerably in 2021 given relatively elevated capex spending and delay in recovering higher purchased gas costs due to Winter storm Uri. Recovery of deferred natural gas purchases and base rate increase in the pending rate proceeding will improve credit metrics, in Fitch's view. Fitch expects Nicor Gas's FFO leverage to be approximately 4.0x over 2023-2025. FFO fixed-charge coverage is projected to average approximately 8.0x over this period.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
Southern Company compares favorably with respect to size, scale and geographic diversity with its peer parent holding companies, American Electric Power Company, Inc. (BBB/Stable), Dominion Energy (BBB+/Stable) and NextEra Energy, Inc. (A-/Stable). The proportion of EBITDA generated from regulated operations at 86% is less favorable compared with AEP's 97% and Dominion's 90%, but favorable compared with NextEra's 70%.
The project construction risk related to the construction of new Vogtle nuclear units is abating for The Southern Company with the commercial operations of Unit 3. At the same time, Dominion's largest utility subsidiary is undertaking the construction of a 2.6 GW off-shore wind project at a total construction cost of $9.8 billion. Fitch is concerned about significant delays and/or costs escalation in this project given several projects in the U.S. and globally have been cancelled or renegotiated due to supply chain issues and associated cost escalation.
Southern Company's projected FFO leverage metrics at 4.7x by 2024 are weaker than the projected metrics for NextEra's 4.5x, but stronger than AEP's approximately 5.7x and Dominion's > 5.0x over 2023-2025.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
Fitch's key assumptions within the rating case for Southern Company include:
--At Alabama Power, no increase under the rate stabilization and equalization mechanism in 2023-2024; rate increase to reflect new gas generation additions; approximately $6.8 billion of capex in 2023-2025; ability to exceed its authorized weighted cost of equity range; and 0.5%-1.0% sales increase in 2023-2025;
--At Georgia Power, Vogtle 3 and 4 construction costs and schedule per the latest estimates; rate increases as reflected in the December 2022 PSC order; recovery of under-recovered fuel expenses over a three-year period; and retail sales growth of 0.5%-1.0% over 2023-2025;
--At Mississippi Power, modest performance evaluation plan retail and wholesale base rate increases; modest decline in KWH sales in 2023-2025; and approximately $300 million-$325 million capex annually;
--At Southern Power, committed capex of $0.4 billion over 2023-2025; and funding of growth capex primarily using internally generated cash and third-party equity;
--At Southern Company Gas and its subsidiaries, total capex to average $1.8 billion annually from 2023-2025; and constructive rate outcomes for pending rate cases.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
The Southern Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
-- Sustained FFO leverage below 4.5x;
--Vogtle Unit 4 placed in-service with no material escalation of currently estimated costs to complete and schedule;
--Strong operating performance of Vogtle Units 3 and 4.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Significant time/cost overrun for the Vogtle 4 units and/or poor operating performance of Units 3 and 4 that lead to unrecoverable costs for Georgia Power that are primarily debt-financed by Southern Company;
--Sustained FFO leverage above 5.0x.
Alabama Power Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Positive rating action is unlikely unless Southern Company is upgraded by one notch or more and FFO leverage sustains below 3.0x.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Downgrade of parent, Southern Company, by one notch;
--A sharp industrial slowdown in Alabama Power's service territory that depresses margins as well as curtails its flexibility to continue to earn attractive ROEs;
--Unexpected negative regulatory developments that cause a mismatch between incurrence and recovery of capital and operating expenses;
--Sustained FFO leverage above 4.0x.
Georgia Power Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Commercial operations of Vogtle Unit 4 without significant schedule delays and/or cost increases;
--Strong operating performance of Units 3 and 4;
--FFO leverage sustaining below 4.0x.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Further material cost or schedule escalation for Vogtle 4 unit;
--Deterioration in the regulatory environment in Georgia;
--FFO leverage sustaining above 5.0x.
Mississippi Power Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Constructive regulatory outcomes in Mississippi;
--FFO leverage sustaining below 4.0x.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Unfavorable outcomes in pending and future rate proceedings that signal continuation of a contentious regulatory environment;
--FFO leverage above 5.0x on a sustainable basis.
Southern Power Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Positive rating action for Southern Power is not anticipated at this time as Fitch typically caps the IDR of non-regulated power generation company at 'BBB+'.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Downgrade of parent, Southern Company, by one notch;
--Significant deterioration in power demand, which could negatively affect re-contracting of natural gas-fired power generation output once existing contracts mature;
--Aggressive investment strategies, such as buying or building merchant generation assets or taking on major construction or completion risks on unconventional technologies;
--Debt-funded acquisitions or new development activities;
--FFO leverage exceeding 3.5x on a sustainable basis.
Southern Company Gas
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Positive rating action is not anticipated in light of the sizeable capex program and reliance on parent for equity contribution.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--FFO leverage sustains above 5.3x and FFO fixed-charge below 4.0x by 2020;
--Failure to obtain sufficient equity support from the regulators and/or its parent, the Southern Company, for its large capex program, such that the leverage ratio exceeds the guideline ratio above;
--Shift toward risky uncontracted nonutility businesses;
--Negative developments in the regulatory supportiveness in the gas utilities' service territories.
Atlanta Gas Light Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--With close linkage to its parent, primary triggers would be any positive changes in the ratings of GAS.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--With close linkage to its parent, primary triggers would be any negative changes in the ratings of GAS.
Nicor Gas Company
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Positive rating action is unlikely unless Southern Company is upgraded by one notch or more and FFO leverage sustains below 3.0x.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Downgrade of parent, Southern Company, by one notch;
--Adverse change in the Illinois regulatory environment;
--FFO leverage ratio above 4x and/or FFO fixed charge coverage below 4.5x on a sustained basis.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Liquidity: At June 30, 2023, Southern Company and its subsidiaries had approximately $9.6 billion of total available liquidity, which includes unused committed credit arrangements with banks of $7.5 billion and $2.1 billion in cash and cash equivalents. A portion of unused credit with banks is allocated to provide liquidity support to the utility subsidiaries' variable-rate pollution-control bonds and CP programs. The amount of variable-rate pollution control revenue bonds outstanding requiring liquidity support as of June 30, 2023 was approximately $1.4 billion.
In May 2023, Southern Company and Southern Power combined and extended their multi-year credit arrangements previously maturing in 2026, resulting in a single aggregate $2.45 billion facility (currently allocated $1.85 billion for Southern Company and $600 million for Southern Power) maturing in 2028. The allocations between Southern Company and Southern Power can be adjusted. Southern Company also entered into a new $150 million credit arrangement maturing in 2024.
ISSUER PROFILE
Southern Company owns three vertically integrated electric utilities serving Alabama, Georgia and Mississippi and four gas distribution utilities serving Illinois, Georgia, Virginia and Tennessee. It also owns investments in four Federal Energy Regulatory Commission regulated pipelines and 12.5 GW of nonregulated generation.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
Fitch provides equity credit to junior subordinated debt at Southern Company and Georgia Power in accordance with Fitch's applicable criteria.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
The Southern Company
LT IDRBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
ST IDRF2 Affirmed
F2 
junior subordinated
LTBBB Affirmed
BBB 
senior unsecured
LTBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
junior subordinated
LTBBB- Affirmed
BBB- 
senior unsecured
STF2 Affirmed
F2 
Southern Company Gas
LT IDRBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
Southern Company Gas Capital Corporation
   senior unsecured
LTBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
senior unsecured
STF2 Affirmed
F2 
