Fitch Upgrades Sabine Pass Liquefaction LLC's IDR, Sr. Notes to 'BBB+'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - New York - 31 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded Sabine Pass Liquefaction LLC's (SPL) senior secured notes rating and Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'BBB+' from 'BBB'. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
RATING RATIONALE
The rating upgrade for SPL reflects improved debt service coverage metrics under Fitch's rating case resulting from material debt reduction not factored into Fitch's previous forecast. The rating upgrade takes into account the material reliance on revenue from counterparties that are unrated or rated below the project's assigned rating to meet debt service in outer years under Fitch's assumed amortization profile. However, stress analysis show that SPL's coverage metrics would remain sufficient for the assigned rating even if revenue from those same counterparties was based on Fitch's merchant liquefaction pricing assumptions.
SPL's ratings reflect stable cash flows supported by long-term revenue contracts with investment grade counterparties that effectively pass-through fixed and variable expenses for the SPL facility that produces liquefied natural gas (LNG). Operations have been in line with expectations since the first train became operational in 2016. Firm pipeline transportation capacity and a liquid domestic gas market sufficiently mitigate natural gas supply risk in full lifting mode by off-takers. Fitch's rating case, which incorporates operational and financial stresses, yields an aggregate average debt service coverage ratio (DSCR) of about 2.7x. The project life coverage ratio (PLCR) minimum is about 2.5x (in 2023).
The IDR of SPL is equivalent to the ratings on the senior secured borrowings. SPL is structured as a bankruptcy remote, special purpose vehicle and is rated as a project finance entity with no recovery estimate incorporated into the rating. As such, Fitch considers the IDR equivalent to the issuer's lowest rated security (i.e., the senior secured bonds). If SPL issues subordinate or unsecured debt rated below the secured debt, the IDR could be downgraded to a lower rating level.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Operation Risk - Midrange
SPL is effectively self-operating with a management team with extensive experience in liquefaction and a staff that has benefited from several years of experience operating SPL trains. The project design has built-in redundancies for major equipment and is oversized in comparison to contractual performance obligations. The project is further insulated by a 25-year Contractual Services Agreement (CSA) with GE Oil & Gas, Inc. (GE) for all gas turbine maintenance. SPL's cost drivers are well-defined and marginal costs are flexible depending on the operating profile. The CSA with GE and the modularity of the project design allows for maintenance costs to be spread over time.
Supply Risk - Midrange
SPL has contracted firm transportation capacity at fixed rates across a diverse set of pipelines, sufficient to meet maximum potential loads. Its approach to gas procurement provides sufficient near-to-medium term contracted volumes while maintaining appropriate flexibility for long-term needs. The ability to source gas from all major producing regions in North America sufficiently mitigates the risk associated with the project's sizeable gas needs in full lifting mode. SPL continues to mitigate supply risk by increasing volumes of firm transportation along third-party pipelines with direct connection to the SPL site.
Revenue Risk - Composite - Midrange
SPL has entered into LNG Sale and Purchase Agreements (SPAs) with numerous third-party off-takers and one affiliate off-taker. Each third-party SPA offtaker provides revenue from a capacity payment that is paid regardless of the LNG volumes lifted and a commodity-based payment per unit of LNG lifted. SPL is able to effectively pass along variable fuel costs through the commodity payment (linked to Henry Hub gas prices), while fixed costs are covered by the fixed capacity fees of the SPAs. This structure insulates SPL from broader trends in the demand for LNG. In Fitch's base case, revenue from uncontracted and affiliate-contracted volumes are assumed sold in merchant markets, thus adding more but potentially volatile revenue.
Debt Structure - Midrange
SPL's debt is structured as a series of bullet maturities staggered annually from 2024 to 2030 and a series of fully amortizing debt due 2037. While no single bullet maturity represents more than 15% of principal outstanding, SPL is nonetheless significantly exposed to the risk of rising interest rates. Upon refinancing, structural covenants force SPL to fully amortize the debt by SPA termination while maintaining coverage consistent with the rating.
Sufficient market access was demonstrated by successfully financing existing and expected trains through construction at favorable terms over an extended period. SPL has a six-months debt service reserve requirement and a forward and backward-looking distribution test of 1.25x. SPL also has a $1.2 billion revolving credit facility.
Financial Profile
Fitch's financial analysis considers the impact of various lifting scenarios, gas pricing scenarios, higher operating expenses, merchant price profiles and higher refinance rates. The Fitch base case assumes full SPA lifting under Fitch's base natural gas price deck, no increase to operating expenses, and assumed merchant liquefaction prices for excess production capacity above non-affiliated SPA volumes.
The base case DSCR average is about 3.0x and PLCR minimum is about 2.7x in 2023. The Fitch rating case also assumes full SPA lifting under Fitch's low natural gas price deck, a 10% increase to non-fixed operating expenses, and lower merchant prices. The rating DSCR average is about 2.7x and PLCR minimum is about 2.5x in 2023.
PEER GROUP
The most relevant peer is Cheniere Corpus Christi Holdings, LLC's (CCH, BBB/Stable), a three train LNG project that uses the same technology, construction contractor, and business profile as SPL. CCH has near identical off-take and operational structure to SPL, in which it receives a fixed capacity fee and Henry Hub-tied fees for lifting, and manages the gas supply and earns most revenue from investment grade SPA counterparties.
CCH recently commenced construction to add seven midscale trains to its facility. CCH's business and financial profiles result in a rating case PLCR minimum of 3x. Other LNG peers use a tolling business model in which longer term SPA offtakers pay fixed fees but also supply the gas, making operating risk the primary risk for those projects.
FLNG Liquefaction 2, LLC (BBB/Watch Negative) is one such peer, a single train project that is part of a larger three train project which has a rating case average DSCR of 1.52x. Cameron LNG's (A-/Stable) is a two-train facility that earns tolling revenue similar to FLIQ2 but which also passes O&M costs through to the off-takers, generating a more stable profile than peer projects. The resulting rating case DSCRs average 2.5x but the rating is constrained by counterparty creditworthiness, similar to SPL.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
--Rating case DSCRs fall below about 1.8x on a sustained basis;
--A downgrade of any material SPA counterparty rated at or above the SPL's rating to a level below SPL's rating;
--Issuance of subordinate or unsecured debt at SPL that is rated below the secured debt would result in a downgrade of the IDR unsecured rating.
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
--The overall credit quality of the SPA counterparties improves sufficiently to support a higher rating.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
TRANSACTION SUMMARY
SPL developed and operates a natural gas liquefaction facility located in Cameron Parish, Louisiana in the U.S. Gulf Coast. The SPL facility includes six operational liquefaction trains capable of converting natural gas (delivered to the facility via several interstate pipelines) into LNG. Bechtel Oil and Gas, Inc. constructed the six trains under EPC-style contracts and achieved commercial operations of the trains between and 2016 and 2022.
Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P. (CQP; BBB-/Stable) owns SPL. SPL is situated adjacent to the Sabine Pass LNG (SPLNG) terminal, which is located on a deep water shipping channel and is owned by CQP. The terminal includes five LNG storage tanks, three marine berths, power generation and other utilities and infrastructure that serve each of the SPL trains. SPL earns most of its cash flow by selling LNG to multiple offtakers under long-term take-and-pay contracts.
CREDIT UPDATE
SPL continues to demonstrate strong operational and financial performance. Production continues to be above original nameplate capacity and generally in line with Fitch's base case assumptions. Production well exceeds SPA production requirements, and SPA offtake remains very strong.
For 2022, SPL reported cash from operations of $3.0 billion covered its reported net interest expense by 4.5x, a figure that reflects interest-only debt service as principal repayments on amortizing debt has not yet begun. Similarly, in the first half of 2023, SPL's reported financials result in a net interest expense coverage of 4.3x, again a number reflecting interest-only debt service.
During the latter half of 2022, SPL repaid $1 billion out of its $1.5 billion notes due May 2023 from operating cash and refinanced the remaining $500 million with new senior amortizing notes. During the first half of 2023, SPL repaid $1.6 billion of its $2 billion in senior notes due March 2024 with a combination of cash on hand and an equity contribution from parent CQP. These early repayments have significantly improved the project's financial profile leading to stronger metrics and the rating action.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
Base Case
Base case assumptions include production capacity of 4.9 million tonnes per annum (MTPA) per train, SPL's forecast O&M costs profile, and full lifting under each SPA based on Fitch's base case Henry Hub natural gas curve. Excess production capacity beyond non-affiliated SPA requirements is assumed to be re-contracted at a base fee of $2.25/mmBtu. Bullet debt is assumed refinanced at maturity into new debt that amortizes fully by 2038 with an interest rate of 6.5%. Under these base case assumptions, the aggregate average DSCR is about 3.0x, and the PLCR minimum is about 2.7x, in 2023.
Rating Case
Rating case assumptions include production capacity of 4.75 MTPA per train, a 10% increase to base case O&M costs, and full lifting under each SPA based on Fitch's rating case Henry Hub natural gas curve. Excess production capacity beyond non-affiliated SPA requirements is assumed to be re-contracted at a base fee of $1.95/mmBtu. Bullet debt is assumed refinanced at maturity into new debt that amortizes fully by 2038 with an interest rate of 6.5%. Under these rating case assumptions, the aggregate average DSCR is 2.7x, and the PLCR minimum is about 2.5x, in 2023.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
PUBLIC RATINGS WITH CREDIT LINKAGE TO OTHER RATINGS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Sabine Pass Liquefaction, LLC
LT IDRBBB+ Upgrade
BBB 
Sabine Pass Liquefaction, LLC/Debt/1 LT
LTBBB+ Upgrade
BBB 
