Fitch Places RPT Realty on Rating Watch Positive

Fitch Ratings - New York - 01 Sep 2023: Fitch Ratings has placed the ratings of RPT Realty (RPT) and its operating partnership, RPT Realty, L.P., including its 'BBB-' Issuer Default Rating (IDR) and underlying issuances outstanding, on Rating Watch Positive.
The rating action follows RPT Realty's announcement of a definitive merger agreement under which RPT will be acquired by Kimco (KIM, unrated), an owner and operator of open-air, grocery-anchored shopping centers and a growing portfolio of mixed-use assets, in an all-stock transaction valued at approximately $2 billion, including the assumption of debt and preferred stock. Upon closing, Kimco expects to have a pro forma equity market capitalization of approximately $13 billion and a total enterprise value of approximately $22 billion.
The Positive Rating Watch is driven by Fitch's expectation that the pro-forma post-acquisition credit profile of the combined RPT Realty/Kimco business will be stronger than RPT's standalone credit profile. From a leverage perspective, on a standalone basis, RPT and KIM's company-reported consolidated net debt/EBITDA was 6.4x and 5.5x, respectively, as of June 30, 2023. The metric on a combined basis is anticipated to be leverage neutral for KIM, at 5.5x (pro-forma for the transaction), including approximately $34 million of expected annual cost synergies. Additionally, Fitch looks for the combined company to have increased portfolio diversification.
The transaction is projected to close in 1Q24, subject to RPT shareholder approval and other customary closing conditions.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Cash Flows Are Strengthening: RPT's SSNOI has increased recently, driven by strong leasing activity, blended re-leasing spreads likely in the mid- to high-single digits, and leasing volumes that have been among the highest annual total volumes in nearly a decade. Fitch expects SSNOI growth to continue at mid-single digit rates, supported by occupancy gains. Occupancy is forecast to reach the 95% level by the end of 2025.
Diversified Tenant Base, But Limited Granularity: RPT's portfolio is appropriately diversified by tenant, with the top 10 tenants typically accounting for 24.1% of annualized base rent as of June 30, 2023. Of note, RPT's ABR is generated primarily by national and regional operators, typically more than 85%, with the remainder generated by local tenants. Fitch is generally concerned about the health and durability of small/local businesses, especially during a recessionary environment, which are inherently less sophisticated and less well-capitalized versus regional and national counterparts, though they remain an essential part of a shopping center's business mix.
Weaker tenants such as Regal Cinemas (2.1% at June 30, 2023), Bed Bath & Beyond (1.4%), and Party City (0.4%) are a concern, though Fitch acknowledges RPT's progress in reducing exposure and the remaining should be manageable. RPT plans to address potential short-term NOI disruption as an opportunity to fill with better credit tenants.
Leverage Is Improving: Fitch expects REIT leverage (Fitch-adjusted net debt before preferred stock/recurring operating EBITDA) to trend lower over the next few years, returning to the mid-5x to low-6x range over the forecast period, as EBITDA continues to recover. RPT's leverage has been on the decline since spiking during the pandemic. The company reaffirmed its long-term target of 5.5x-6.5x, and there are no debt maturities until 2025. As RPT executes its external growth strategy, on balance sheet and through its joint ventures (JVs), Fitch expects the company to have the financial flexibility, in terms of funding mix, to guide leverage to its historical range.
JVs Provide Attractive Growth Capital: RPT has created several strategic JVs, including its net lease real estate platform that was formed in March of 2021, to access attractively priced external growth capital, while also supplementing its returns through recurring management fees. Executed well, the strategy should allow the company to grow its operating platform, manage portfolio cash flow risk, target larger acquisition opportunities, and potentially provide an attractive acquisition pipeline down the line.
In the near-to-intermediate term, Fitch expects a positive impact on the internal growth profile as well, with RPT retaining faster growing, higher yielding, albeit moderately riskier opportunities on the company's balance sheet.
A moderate amount of joint venture ownership can help diversify REITs' capital sources, and establish and maintain relationships with deep-pocketed through-the-cycle capital providers. However, Fitch's credit analysis favors fee-simple ownership of unencumbered properties given superior operational and financial flexibility.
Executing Geographic Strategy: RPT is working to expand in new and existing markets primarily in the Northeast and Southeast, with particular focus on Boston, Atlanta, Tampa and Nashville, while reducing its exposure to the Midwest, including Detroit and Cincinnati, both of which are secondary markets that exhibit average population demographics (i.e. household income, population density). Fitch would positively view greater market diversification in the portfolio to better balance those individual market exposures.
Experienced Management, Strong Execution: RPT's executive team has experience operating mall and shopping center assets, including at other public REITs. RPT's operating performance and balance sheet has shown meaningful improvement under the new management team that joined during 2Q18. Management's ability has proven that it is successfully navigating near-term tenant stress, returning the company to its growth footing and financial policy targets will be key credit profile considerations in the case for a higher rating.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
RPT has increased the size of its portfolio through acquisition activity primarily with the help of its JV strategy. As of June 30, 2023, the portfolio comprised a total of 105 properties, including 56 multi-tenant retail properties and 49 net leased retail properties. Despite this progress, the company will likely require a more deliberate pace of quality improvement through effective asset management, which should allow the portfolio to reach in place rents more in line with the peer average.
Current occupancy levels are also below its peers' levels, including Brixmor Property Group, Inc. (BBB/Stable), SITE Centers Corp. (BBB/Stable), Kite Realty Group Trust (BBB/Stable), Retail Opportunity Investments Corp. (BBB/Stable) and Spirit Realty Capital, Inc. (BBB/Stable). In addition, the gradual growth should reduce RPT's asset-level and market-level concentrations over time. Success in achieving these objectives will be critical components of an upgrade case to 'BBB' for RPT.
Fitch expects RPT's leverage to decline to the mid-5x to low-6x range through the forecast period. This is an improvement from 2020-2021 levels, and is within the company's long-term leverage target of 5.5x-6.5x. While leverage is near the upgrade sensitivity for RPT, many of RPT's peers, including SITE Centers Corp., Kite Realty Group Trust, and Spirit Realty Capital, Inc., operate at more favorable levels. This is a factor underpinning RPT's lower rating.
Fitch rates the IDRs of the parent REIT and subsidiary operating partnership on a consolidated basis, using the weak parent/strong subsidiary approach and open access and control factors, based on the entities operating as a single enterprise with strong legal and operational ties.
Fitch applies 50% equity credit to the company's perpetual preferred securities given the cumulative nature of coupon deferral. The instruments are subordinated to debt, lack material covenants and the terms of the change of control do not negate the equity credit judgement. Certain metrics calculate leverage including preferred stock.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
--The aforementioned acquisition is completed in the beginning of 2024;
--SSNOI growth increasing in the mid-single digit range (approximately 4%), as occupancy stabilizes back to the 95% level. However, SSNOI growth is expected to be slightly lower in 2023, as bad debt reserves may be elevated that year due to recent news related to distressed tenants;
--Acquisitions of $223.4 million in 2022 and approximately $200 million in 2024 and 2025. No notable acquisition activity is forecast for 2023. Development spend of $10 million-$20 million per year through the forecast period. Acquisitions and development activity funded primarily by a mix of debt and equity;
--Dispositions of $197.7 million in 2022, with minimal activity thereafter.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Fitch expects the Rating Watch will be resolved with a positive rating action if the transaction is consummated as proposed.
If the acquisition is not completed, the following rating sensitivities would apply to RPT Realty as a standalone business:
--Increased portfolio granularity, evidenced by top 10 assets below 25% of total ABR;
--Fitch's expectation of REIT leverage (net debt before preferred stock/recurring operating EBITDA) sustaining below 6.5x;
--Fitch's expectation of unencumbered assets to unsecured debt (UA/UD) sustaining at or above 2.5x (based on a stressed 8.5% cap rate).
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
If the acquisition is not completed, the following rating sensitivities would apply to RPT Realty as a standalone business:
--Fitch's expectation of REIT leverage sustaining above 7.5x;
--Failure to maintain unencumbered UA/UD above 2.0x (based on stressed 8.5% cap rate);
--Fitch's expectation of fixed charge coverage sustaining below 2.0x;
--Sustained deterioration in operating performance (e.g., occupancy losses, net effective rent rolldown).
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Strong Liquidity Coverage: Fitch estimates RPT's base case liquidity coverage, defined as sources of liquidity (including unrestricted cash, availability under unsecured revolving credit facilities and retained cash flow from operating activities after dividends) divided by uses, is more than sufficient through 2024 and strong for the rating. As of June 30, 2023, RPT had ample liquidity, with $5.65 million in consolidated cash and cash equivalents and $471 million of availability under its $500 million revolving credit facility. Additionally, with the repayment of a $27 million mortgage secured by The Shops on Lane Avenue in October 2022, all debt maturities were eliminated until 2025.
ISSUER PROFILE
RPT Realty is a REIT that owns and operates a portfolio of open-air shopping destinations in the U.S. As of June 30, 2023, the portfolio consisted of 43 wholly-owned shopping centers, 13 shopping centers owned through its grocery-anchored JV, and 49 retail properties owned through its net lease JV.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
No material non-standard financial adjustments. Stock based compensation was considered a reduction to SG&A and an addback to EBITDA.
Sources of Information
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
RPT Realty, L.P.
LT IDRBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
senior unsecured
LTBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
RPT Realty
LT IDRBBB- Rating Watch On
BBB- 
preferred
LTBB Rating Watch On
BB 
