Fitch Upgrades NCIG's Senior Secured Debt to 'BBB'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - Sydney - 14 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded Newcastle Coal Infrastructure Group Pty Ltd's (NCIG) senior secured debt to 'BBB', from 'BBB-'. The Outlook is Stable.
RATING RATIONALE
The upgrade reflects greater certainty in NCIG's senior debt retirement plan as a result of accelerated scheduled and planned amortisation, supported by the 2022 refinancing, coal price-linked accelerated amortisation (CPLAA) and term charge instalment from a subsidiary of BHP Group Limited (A/Stable). Under the Fitch cases, NCIG will have fully repaid all outstanding senior debt by 2032, against the 2033 target in 2022 and the 2038 target in all previous years. The accelerated debt amortisation profile will reduce senior creditors' exposure to long-term uncertainty associated with the thermal coal sector.
The ratings reflect the coal export terminal's highly concentrated exposure to a single commodity, thermal coal, and the small number of terminal users. This exposure is somewhat mitigated by its robust ship-or-pay agreements (SoPAs) that feature fully contracted capacity and pricing flexibility. Fitch's breakeven analysis highlights the flexibility of NCIG's contractual cost pass-through framework to withstand substantial stress from higher debt costs or user defaults, although the pass-through also increases counterparty risk.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Concentrated Exposure to Thermal Coal: Volume Risk - Midrange
NCIG benefits from its close proximity and rail connection to the Hunter Valley coal mining region in Australia and strong long-term contracts with users. However, it is highly exposed to the longer-term uncertainty in the market for thermal coal, which makes up around 85% of its volume. NCIG also faces potential competition from an adjacent terminal, Port Waratah Coal Services, which charges substantially lower fees, although NCIG is fully contracted and provides customers with certain operational advantages.
A protracted thermal coal-sector downturn could pressure the margins of port users and their ability to comply with the SoPAs. A default by one or more users or lower coal production at the source mines, and the consequent reduction in actual throughput, would raise terminal fees per tonne of coal shipped for the remaining users, increasing any financial stress. This risk, combined with NCIG's high cargo and customer concentration and nearby competition, negatively affects the volume risk assessment and, ultimately, the issuer's overall credit profile.
Full Cost Pass-Through: Price Risk - Stronger
NCIG's capacity is fully contracted to eight shippers under rolling 10-year SoPAs. If a user defaults, the other users would fund the resulting revenue shortfall on a pro rata basis, insulating the terminal from a single user default. NCIG benefits from a strong ability to modify tariffs, including full pass-through to users, with only financing costs subject to a cap. Monthly user fees are based on budgeted costs, but NCIG can revise tariffs if costs are higher than it expected.
BHP has said it will cease mining at its Mt Arthur coal mine by the financial year ending June 2030 (FY30). BHP's capacity entitlement is the largest share of NCIG's nominal throughput, but the rating impact is limited as the shipper will be subject to term charge payments under the SoPA. This would amortise to zero its share of NCIG's total outstanding debt by June 2030.
User-Funded Capital Programme: Infra-Renewal Risk - Midrange
NCIG, established in 2010, is well-maintained and completed its latest expansion in 2013, increasing capacity to 66 million tonnes per annum (mtpa), although the infrastructure can operate at a higher throughput of 79mtpa. Users are contractually required to fund NCIG's capital programme costs on an uncapped basis, including capex, repairs and maintenance. The infra-renewal attribute assessment is constrained to 'Midrange' due to the terminal's dependence on the uncertain long-term economic performance of the source mines, which is exposed to the volatile thermal coal market.
Well-Managed Refinancing Risk: Debt Structure - Midrange
NCIG's debt structure benefits from a substantial interest-rate hedging programme, which limits the current floating-rate exposure to around 10% over the next five years. The risk of rising interest rates is mitigated by the financing cost pass-through, subject to a cap. The senior debt benefits from a USD85 million debt-service reserve account, which is sufficient to cover six months of senior debt service, as well as from distribution lockup covenants and default debt-service coverage ratio (DSCR) covenants. However, the ratio levels are set lower than for similar assets.
The debt structure entails a variety of bullet and partially amortising instruments, which must be refinanced on an ongoing basis. This is mitigated by NCIG's broad borrowing base - including bank debt, US private placements, the Rule 144A and Regulation S market, and the syndicated Japanese debt market - and by the issuer's well-laddered debt maturity profile. NCIG's management has consistently demonstrated its ability to refinance debt well in advance of maturity.
NCIG undertook a refinancing exercise in late 2022 that resulted in a more substantial scheduled amortisation profile. Furthermore, management has implemented a CPLAA component of the toll charge. Combined with BHP's term charge payments, this supports senior debt retirement earlier than previously planned under Fitch's base and rating cases.
Financial Profile
The cost recovery nature of NCIG's revenue makes traditional debt metrics less relevant. Fitch has therefore used breakeven analysis to determine the stress level that can be sustained while maintaining a minimum DSCR of 1.0x and staying within the finance cost recovery cap.
For interest-rate stress, NCIG can withstand an increase in the average cost of senior debt over the next five years to around 35% (from 5.2% at FY24 in our rating case). For contracted-capacity stress, NCIG can sustain a default of around 65% of the currently contracted capacity while maintaining a senior DSCR of at least 1.0x in June 2023. We consider this credit positive.
PEER GROUP
Queensland-based Dalrymple Bay Finance Pty Ltd (DBT, BBB-/Stable) and North Queensland Export Terminal Pty Ltd (NQXT, BB+/Stable) are NCIG's closest peers. All three coal export terminals have SoPAs with users, but NCIG's rolling 10-year contract terms are longer than those of DBT and NQXT, with much stronger termination provisions. All terminals have full operating cost pass-through frameworks. Some of NCIG's debt is partially amortising, but carries substantial refinancing risk, similar to that of DBT and NQXT.
DBT's and NQXT's concession terms, extending to 2100 and 2110, respectively, are substantially longer than that of NCIG, which terminates in 2053 (including a 10-year extension). NCIG mainly ships thermal coal while DBT's and NQXT's throughput is primarily metallurgical coal, which Fitch sees as a commodity with relatively more stable long-term demand. However, we believe the improvement in NCIG's debt structure and earlier planned repayment of senior debt compared with peer projects mitigates the exposure to the thermal coal market.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
- Contracted capacity falling due to a customer default or a coal-price downturn for a sustained period, making it substantially more likely that a default will occur;
- NCIG failing to complete debt refinancing well in advance of scheduled maturities; and
- any re-gearing, or debt amortisation that is substantially slower than in NCIG's current plan.
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
Positive rating action is considered unlikely in the medium term, given the highly concentrated exposure to a single commodity (thermal coal) and small number of terminal users.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
TRANSACTION SUMMARY
NCIG owns and operates a 66mtpa coal export terminal under a long-term lease that extends to 2053 (including a 10-year extension option). The terminal is located at the Port of Newcastle in New South Wales, Australia.
CREDIT UPDATE
NCIG's total terminal throughput in FY23 was 44.7 million tonnes, a decrease over FY22 due to ongoing extended periods of challenging weather conditions experienced by its shippers together with other upstream effects to the coal supply chain. However, NCIG's SoPA insulated its revenue from any fluctuation in throughput volume. Furthermore, its operating cash flow increased by around USD205 million due to the CPLAA toll charge and the BHP instalment during the year. We expect the CPLAA charge to accelerate NCIG's debt amortisation, especially over the next 1-2 years.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
Fitch's base and rating cases assume the terminal's capacity is fully contracted over the life of the senior debt, which is rated based on its contractual framework, regardless of actual and projected terminal throughput. The remaining stakeholders at NCIG will receive an increase in their capacity allocation after the closure of the Mt Arthur mine, maintaining the contracted capacity at 66mtpa.
The average DSCR under Fitch's cases is 1.37x on average during FY24-FY32. However, the comparability of Fitch's average DSCR calculation is limited by NCIG's ability to adjust revenue to recover operating and financing costs, with the latter subject to a cap, as well as the CPLAA toll charge.
Fitch focused on breakeven analysis, which highlights NCIG's ability to withstand an increase in the average cost of senior debt to 35% over the next five years, against the 5.2% rate assumption (at FY24 in our rating case). The terminal's resilience to a loss of around 60% of contracted capacity, on average in FY24-FY32, is credit positive under our rating case.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
NCIG has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Management Strategy. This is because the company's bullet-amortisation debt structure compounds the risk of limited refinancing options due to lenders' increasing concerns over coal assets, which has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the ratings in conjunction with other factors.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Newcastle Coal Infrastructure Group Pty Ltd
   Newcastle Coal Infrastructure Group Pty Ltd/Debt/1 LT
LTBBB Upgrade
BBB- 
