Fitch Revises Ryder System's Outlook to Positive; Affirms Ratings at 'BBB+'/'F2'

Fitch Ratings - Chicago - 18 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed the Long-Term and Short-Term Issuer Default Ratings (IDRs) of Ryder System, Inc. (Ryder) at 'BBB+' and 'F2', respectively. The Rating Outlook has been revised to Positive from Stable. Fitch has also affirmed Ryder's senior unsecured debt at 'BBB+' and commercial paper (CP) rating at 'F2'.
Today's rating actions have been taken as part of a periodic review of North American commercial fleet management companies, which is comprised of five public rated firms.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
The Positive Outlook reflects Fitch's expectation for enhanced earnings stability and improved operating performance given Ryder's successful execution of its strategic, operational and financial plan. Despite a more challenging macroeconomic environment, Fitch expects Ryder's credit metrics will remain stronger than historical levels, driven by consistent cash flow generation from its contracted leases, reduced reliance on gains on sale of equipment given the recent revision of its depreciation policies, well-laddered upcoming debt maturities and manageable expected capital expenditures for replacement and fleet growth.
The rating affirmations reflect Ryder's established market position in fleet management solutions (FMS), dedicated transportation solutions (DTS), and supply chain solutions (SCS); the company's strong asset quality; relatively consistent operating cash flow generation; adequate liquidity; and a largely unsecured funding profile.
The ratings are constrained by its pension obligation risk, which could have an impact on balance sheet leverage, though this risk is mitigated by the improved funded status and a higher liability hedge ratio. Rating constraints applicable to the broader truck leasing sector include customer concentrations in the SCS segment, cyclicality inherent in the commercial rental business, sensitivity to used vehicle pricing and residual value risks, as well as the regulatory impact on business trends.
Ryder's asset quality and equipment valuation risks are influenced by the general condition of the domestic economy. Net accounts receivable write-offs as a percentage of revenue generating assets were 0.2% in the first half of 2023 (1H23), which was consistent with the four-year average from 2019-2022. Fitch believes Ryder's loss metrics could increase modestly in a less supportive economic environment but does not expect write-offs to exceed peak levels of 0.4% experienced in 2009.
Gains on used vehicles as a percentage of proceeds from all vehicle sales were 35.3% in the last 12 months (LTM) ended June 30, 2023. This was higher relative to average reported gains of 21.8% during 2019-2022 due to an improvement in vehicle pricing on tractor and trailers. Residual values were at a cyclical peak in 2022 given supply chain pressures and manufacturer backlogs, and Fitch expects gains on used vehicle sales to moderate.
At the end of 2Q23, used vehicle inventory was 7,000 units, up from 3,900 units a year ago, reflecting higher rental de-fleeting activity. Fitch expects Ryder will continue to opportunistically dispose of its vehicles through the retail and wholesale channels to maintain used vehicle inventory within its target range of 7,000-9,000 units over time.
Operating revenue increased 3% in 1H23 yoy driven by revenue growth in SCS and DTS, partially offset by impacts from the exit of FMS in the U.K. Comparable pre-tax earnings were down 27% in 1H23 from a year ago, reflecting lower gains on sales, decreased commercial rental results, and a one-time item, including a $30 million impairment related to a customer bankruptcy in SCS. While the operating environment is expected to be less supportive in 2023, Fitch believes operating performance will benefit from consistent cash flow generation by long-term leases, organic growth from self-managed fleets, improved pricing on existing and new leases, as well as enhanced operating leverage from cost savings initiatives.
Ryder has an articulated long-term leverage target, defined as debt to equity of 2.5x-3.0x. Leverage amounted to 2.1x on this basis at June 30, 2023. For leasing companies, Fitch focuses on managed debt to tangible equity in its analysis of leverage, which includes the present value of lease obligations in debt and excludes goodwill and intangibles and adjusts for the capital charge for adopting new lease accounting standards (ASC 842). On this basis, leverage amounted to 3.1x, which is within Fitch's quantitative benchmark range of 3x-5x for 'bbb' category balance sheet intensive finance and leasing companies with an 'a' sector risk operating environment (SROE) score.
Ryder is predominately funded through unsecured debt, which represented 92.7% of total funding at June 30, 2023 and was well-above fleet leasing peers. Fitch views this favorably, as available unencumbered assets improve balance sheet flexibility in times of market stress.
Fitch believes Ryder's liquidity profile is adequate. At June 30, 2023, Ryder had $218 million in cash, $754 million of borrowing capacity under its revolving credit facility (adjusting for outstanding CP), and $217 million of availability under its trade receivables program. The company also generates substantial cash flow, which amounted to $2.4 billion on an annualized basis for 1H23. Together, this provided 1.2x of $900 million in medium-term notes coming due over the next 12 months and planned net capex of $2.4 billion expected in 2023, which can be adjusted, as necessary.
Improved operating performance and modest growth capex and are expected to result in positive free cash flow (FCF) for 2023 and can be used to reduce borrowings and manage liquidity. Ryder's FCF generation is negatively correlated with economic growth. During periods of growth and increased demand for its vehicles, the company increases its capex to meet demand. The increase in capex frequently results in negative FCF for the period. Conversely, when lease or rental demand declines, the firm has historically quickly managed its fleet down, resulting in positive FCF and an ability to de-lever, as was observed during the coronavirus pandemic as well as the last financial crisis. In connection with its balanced growth strategy, Ryder expects moderate lease growth and improved pricing will increase operating cash flow going forward, with positive FCF expected in most years and over the cycle, which is viewed positively by Fitch.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
--The Outlook could be revised back to Stable if Ryder is unable to execute on its strategy to improve operating revenue growth, driven by earnings pressure, a material weakening in operating cash flow generation, and/or FCF beyond Fitch's expectations.
--A sustained increase in managed debt to tangible equity above 4.0x, resulting from capital returns, substantial pension equity charge, macroeconomic headwinds that result in the firm's competitive positioning, a material weakening in asset quality, an inability to realize residual values on used vehicles, and/or a liquidity coverage falling below 1.0x, would also result in negative rating action.
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
--Enhanced earnings consistency amid a less favorable economic backdrop, with average pre-tax return on average assets above 3.5%, along with a robust funding profile, proactive management of near-term debt maturities and manageable capex, resulting in liquidity coverage in excess of 1.2x could result in an upgrade over the next 18-24 months.
--Differentiated risk management and asset quality performance, while maintaining managed debt to tangible equity below 3.5x, consistent, economic access to the unsecured funding markets and a largely unsecured funding profile could also yield positive rating momentum.
DEBT AND OTHER INSTRUMENT RATINGS: KEY RATING DRIVERS
According to Fitch's 'Non-Bank Financial Institutions Rating Criteria', a Long-Term IDR of 'BBB+' maps to a Short-Term IDR of 'F2' or 'F1'. In order to achieve the higher rating, Ryder would need to have a minimum Funding, Liquidity and Coverage (FLC) score of 'a'. Ryder's FLC score is currently 'bbb'. Accordingly, Fitch has affirmed Ryder's Short-Term IDR at 'F2'.
The equalization of the senior unsecured debt rating with Ryder's Long-Term IDR reflects the firm's predominately unsecured funding profile and unencumbered asset coverage available to senior noteholders, which suggest average recoveries in a stress scenario.
Ryder's CP rating is equalized with its Short-Term IDR.
DEBT AND OTHER INSTRUMENT RATINGS: RATING SENSITIVITIES
The Short-Term IDR is primarily sensitive to the Long-Term IDR and would be expected to move in tandem. However, a material improvement in Ryder's FLC profile, resulting in an upgrade of the subfactor score to 'a' could result in an upgrade of the Short-Term IDR to 'F1'.
The rating assigned to the senior unsecured debt is equalized with the Long-Term IDR, and would be expected to move in tandem. However, a material increase in secured funding, and/or a material reduction in unencumbered assets could result in a widening of the notching between Ryder's Long-Term IDR and unsecured notes.
The CP rating is equalized with the Short-Term IDR and would be expected to move in tandem with it.
ADJUSTMENTS
The Asset Quality score has been assigned below the implied score due to the following adjustment reason: Loan charge-offs, depreciation or impairment policy (negative).
The Capitalization & Leverage score has been assigned above the implied score due to the following adjustment reason: Risk profile and business model (positive).
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Financial Institutions and Covered Bond issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Ryder System, Inc.
LT IDRBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
ST IDRF2 Affirmed
F2 
senior unsecured
LTBBB+ Affirmed
BBB+ 
senior unsecured
STF2 Affirmed
F2 
