Fitch Affirms Vietnam-Based Mong Duong 2's Notes at 'BB'; Outlook Positive

Fitch Ratings - Hong Kong - 09 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed the 'BB' rating on the USD679 million 5.125% senior secured notes due 2029 issued by Mong Duong Finance Holdings B.V., a Netherlands-domiciled SPV. The Outlook is Positive. The issuer acquired all of Vietnam-based AES Mong Duong Power Company Limited's (AES MD) outstanding project financing loans raised for the Mong Duong 2 (MD2) power plant.
RATING RATIONALE
The notes' rating remains capped by Vietnam's sovereign rating (BB/Positive) due to the government guarantee of state counterparty obligations.
The credit profile benefits from a robust take-or-pay power purchase agreement (PPA) with state-owned Vietnam Electricity (EVN, BB/Positive) until 2040, a pass-through mechanism for fuel costs, the government guarantee covering obligations of Vietnamese state counterparties under the PPA and coal supply agreement, an experienced in-house operations and maintenance (O&M) team, strong financial profile, and a fully amortising debt structure that insulates the project against refinancing risk.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Experienced In-House Operator: Operation Risk - Midrange
MD2 employs conventional commercially proven technology and is operated by an experienced in-house team together with shareholders providing technical consulting services through technical services agreements with a stable track record. The actual availability has consistently been higher than the contracted level. The allowed outages energy is calculated annually, which allows it to compensate for a forced outage in one month with higher availability in the next month. The plant is also permitted to carry up to 160GWh of unused allowed outages energy from one year to another if it remains unutilised.
Heat rates have improved after combustion issues were resolved and through the use of better quality of coal, aided by an enhanced operating system and operational efficiency improvements such as reductions in load change times. Nevertheless, the cost-plus nature of the O&M and limited technical advisor input in the rating process expose the project to a certain level of cost uncertainty, constraining our operation risk assessment to 'Midrange'.
Fuel Supply Risk Passed Through: Supply Risk - Midrange
MD2 benefits from a 25-year coal-supply agreement with Vinacomin, at a regulated coal price not exceeding that charged to other EVN power plants. These performance obligations and financial commitments are further backed by a government guarantee covering the whole debt tenor. The build-operate-transfer (BOT) contract further insulates the project against the risk of coal supply interruptions.
MD2 also reserves the right to buy coal from an alternative source, while Vinacomin is obligated to compensate for increases in cost, capped at 3% of the total payments receivable by Vinacomin from MD2 in respect of any contract year. Vinacomin has an abundant supply of fuel sources available near the project site, a large pipeline of projects and planned new coal mines to sustain the domestic coal supply.
Robust Long-Term PPA: Revenue Risk - Stronger
MD2's long-term PPA with EVN is until 2040. The tariff structure is designed to cover debt service, a certain return of equity, fixed O&M costs (regardless of electricity output), variable O&M costs and fuel reimbursement, with the latter subject to meeting contracted heat rate requirements. The take-or-pay mechanism effectively eliminates merchant power-price risk and underpins cash flow visibility. Inflation risk is further mitigated by indexation of O&M tariff components to the US and Vietnam CPI.
Fitch views the cost pass-through from changes in environmental legislation or permits to EVN as standard and the termination provisions under the PPA as a stronger attribute.
Fully Amortising, Non-Standard Structure - Debt Structure: Midrange
The offshore SPV issued a four-year loan and 10-year senior secured fixed-rate notes to refinance the BOT loan of AES MD at a lower interest rate. The new debt, which has the same quantum and amortisation profile as the BOT loan, is serviced by BOT loan debt service payments. The four-year loan was fully repaid in May 2023.
The security package of the original financing is available to the new lenders but indirectly, through the loan provided by the offshore SPV to AES MD. The new lenders will also benefit from a pledge of shares in the SPV and security over the SPV's assets. The transaction's structure is not standard as the offshore SPV and AES MD do not have a direct relationship, either through the shareholding of the offshore SPV or a guarantee from AES MD.
The debt is fully amortising and ranks pari passu. The amortisation will be sequential among the two tranches. The debt is protected by covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, business activities and asset disposals. It further benefits from a backward-looking distribution lock-up at a 1.15x debt-service coverage ratio (DSCR) and six-month debt-service reserve in the form of a letter of credit. The maintenance reserve account will also be prefunded for a major overhaul capex over the next six years.
PEER GROUP
We view the notes (BBB-/Stable) issued under Minejesa Capital BV and guaranteed by PT Paiton Energy as comparable. Paiton, in eastern Java, is the second-largest independent power producer in Indonesia with an installed capacity of 2,045MW for its three-unit power complex, of which one unit is using super-critical pulverised coal technology. Both projects are protected by take-or-pay long-term PPAs with fuel cost effectively passed through to off-takers and run by experienced in-house teams, while Paiton benefits from a longer operating history.
Paiton's debt structure is more typical of project finance transactions. It has an average annual DSCR of 1.40x and a minimum of 1.22x under Fitch's rating case.
MD2 also compares well against PT Lestari Banten Energi (LBE), which guaranteed the notes (BBB- /Stable) issued under LLPL Capital Pte. Ltd. LBE operates a 635MW super-critical coal-fired power plant in west Java. The project, like MD2, has a favourable long-term PPA with the state-owned electricity supplier to insulate it against merchant risk. LBE also benefits from input from US-based Black & Veatch, which allows Fitch to apply lower stress in the rating case.
LBE's debt is fully amortising with a six-month debt-service reserve account and a distribution lockup at 1.20x DSCR, which is slightly stronger than that of MD2. LBE has an average profile annual DSCR of 1.35x and a minimum of 1.21x under Fitch's rating case.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
- A downgrade of Vietnam's sovereign rating to 'BB-'.
- Operational difficulties or other developments that result in the projected annual DSCR dropping below 1.20x in Fitch's rating case.
Factors that Could, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
An upgrade of Vietnam's sovereign rating to 'BB+' with no deterioration in the underlying credit profile.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Sovereigns, Public Finance and Infrastructure issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of three notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
CREDIT UPDATE
MD2's overall sound operating performance spilled over into Contract Year 8 (22 April 2022 to 21 April 2023) without any penalty imposed due to availability or reliability. The average net capacity factor improved to 71.5% in Contract Year 8, from 69% in the preceding contract year, despite the forced outage in 2H22. The outage, mainly caused by a boiler tube leak and combustion issue of Unit 1, induced vibration of Unit 1's draft fan and leakage of Unit 2's high-pressure heater, but the issues were examined and fixed immediately without further impact.
Healthy cash flow led to a DSCR of 1.50x for the 12-month period ended March 2023, without any breach of debt covenants.
A capex budget totalling USD12 million has been approved by management for FY24, with the majority of the amount to be allocated to continuous heat rate improvements. MD2 expects an improvement of 100 BTU/kWh for the duration of the equipment's overhaul cycle, albeit of a cyclic nature. The remainder of the capex will be used for improvements in reliability, enhancements to return equipment to full capacity, and additions or replacements with better or updated equipment.
Insurance premiums actually paid in 2023 are around USD10.6 million, USD0.9 million higher than premiums actually paid in 2022, mainly due to inflation. The coverage and insurance providers are both largely unchanged from the previous year.
AES Corporation announced on 4 January 2021 an agreement to sell its entire equity interest in AES MD2 and Mong Duong Finance Holdings B.V. to a consortium led by a US-based investor. However, the transaction was not closed by the long stop date of 31 December 2022 and was terminated by the parties. AES Corporation has declared that it will continue exiting AES MD2 and re-launch the sale process.
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
Fitch focuses on average and minimum profile DSCRs to assess the resilience of the projected cash flow, given the fully amortising nature of the debt and definite term of the PPA.
Fitch's base case largely follows management's forecast on key operating assumptions except the heat rate, which is projected to be 0.5% above the PPA's target. It also factors in Fitch's macroeconomic assumptions for the US and Vietnam CPIs and exchange rates. MD2's annual DSCR is averaged at 1.47x with a minimum DSCR of 1.43x (previously 1.48x and 1.43x) under Fitch's base case.
Fitch's rating case further applies a combination of stresses on outage durations (1pp increase to annual forced outages duration and 10% stress to planned outage durations) and a heat rate that is 2% above the PPA's target and a 15% increase on the operating costs and capex, in accordance with Fitch's Thermal Power Projects Rating Criteria. This results in a revised average DSCR of 1.38x and minimum of 1.34x (previously 1.39x and 1.33x).
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
PUBLIC RATINGS WITH CREDIT LINKAGE TO OTHER RATINGS
The rating of MD2's notes is capped at Vietnam's Country Ceiling.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Mong Duong Finance Holdings B.V.
   Mong Duong Finance Holdings B.V./Debt/1 LT
LTBB Affirmed
BB 
