Fitch Affirms Invitation Homes at 'BBB'; Outlook Revised to Positive

Fitch Ratings - New York - 17 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has affirmed the ratings of Invitation Homes Inc (NYSE: INVH) and Invitation Homes Operating Partnership LP including the Long-Term Issuer Default Ratings (IDRs) at 'BBB'. The Rating Outlook has been revised to Positive from Stable. The ratings reflect the progress the company has made to reduce leverage and enhance its capital markets access. In addition, the company has benefited from favorable operating trends in the sector as well as a well-diversified, granular portfolio.
The Positive Outlook revision considers INVH's balance sheet and capital access strength but limited operating history in an industry experiencing both headwinds and tailwinds. Fitch expects INVH's leverage to remain below 6x through the forecast period, in line with the company's stated net leverage target policy of 5.5x to 6.0x.
Additionally, Invitation Homes has demonstrated consistent access to capital through the cycle most recently with its $800 million unsecured notes offering in August 2023. Such access positions the Company well for opportunistic transactions and cushion in addressing upcoming maturities. This is possible with Invitation Homes' relationships with builders, joint venture (JV) partnerships and capital recycling program that provide for a variety of funding avenues and future growth opportunities.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Balance Sheet Well Positioned: Fitch expects INVH's REIT leverage (net debt to recurring EBITDA) to sustain around the mid-5x level, which is consistent with the company's long-term net leverage target of 5.5x-6.0x. INVH's most recent $650 million acquisition of 1,900 homes demonstrates the company's solid liquidity position that enables opportunistic transactions. The recent August 2023 notes offering reinforces the company's strong capital access through the cycle. This unsecured issuance is also in line with the company's unsecured borrowing strategy, which Fitch expects will continue in the future.
Operating Fundamentals: The single-family rental market has benefited from recent supply and demand fundamentals affected by the current economic backdrop and demographic shifts. Inflationary pressures have driven up mortgage rates creating market imbalance due to a lack of buyer affordability and seller lock in interest effect. Such barriers to home ownership coupled with an aging population have added momentum for single-family rentals; management has estimated the monthly cost to rent a home is approximately $1,000 less than mortgage payments for comparable home ownership, thus continuing to provide a strong value proposition to its tenants.
Very High Portfolio Granularity: INVH has very high portfolio granularity with its ownership of over 82,000 homes across 16 different markets, as of June 30, 2023. Assets are acquired, oftentimes, one unit at a time and can be disposed individually, allowing landlords to hone in on neighborhoods, streets, and unit characteristics that optimize growth and value. INVH's focus on building scale and density within markets enables the company to capture efficiencies across its portfolio. Fitch expects this to continue as the company grows through acquisitions, and the company has shown an ability to scale acquisition activity, as most recently evidenced in the company's $650 million acquisition of 1,900 homes post 2Q23.
Additionally, the portfolio benefits from good geographic diversity and exposure to growing Sunbelt and West Coast markets. Top markets as a percentage of 2Q23 revenues include Atlanta (12.6%), South Florida (12.5%), Southern California (SoCal) (11.3%), Tampa (10.2%) and Phoenix (9.5%). Atlanta and SoCal have been particularly impacted most recently due to lease compliance backlog. Given the scale of these markets, near-term turnover and operating expenses have increased with the expectation to moderate as the tenant base improves.
Strong Access to Capital: INVH has demonstrated strong capital access, including common equity, secured mortgage debt, unsecured and secured bank debt, joint ventures and public unsecured debt markets. The company launched its first public senior unsecured notes in August 2021, and has since priced three additional public bonds, including the aforementioned 2023 notes, enabling the company to proactively manage upcoming maturities. Fitch views this positively, as it can allow the company to efficiently monetize asset value to provide contingent liquidity.
Future Growth Opportunities: Fitch expects Invitation Homes to continue to grow through a mix of outright acquisitions, JV acquisitions and new product pipeline. INVH has established a partnership with homebuilder PulteGroup, providing for additional investment opportunities at attractive yields while minimizing development risk and balance sheet drag. This relationship also allows for INVH to expand its new product pipeline during a time of low existing inventory.
Additionally, the JV with Rockpoint Group allows INVH to target premium market locations with higher price point homes for lease while generating management fees, and the investment in Pathway Homes expands housing solutions for single family home renters.
Limited Operating History: INVH's rapid growth and shorter operating history relative to other traditional property types results in limited comparable performance metrics. Positively, the company's portfolio metrics have held consistently strong since the beginning of the pandemic, aided by secular tailwinds of INVH's target resident demographic and geographic focus. Fitch does expect this growth to moderate relative to tougher prior year comps however remains positive through forecast.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
INVH's rating reflects the company's focus on quality, single family rental (SFR) assets in Sunbelt and West Coast markets. Although SFRs tend to have shorter lease terms than most traditional property sectors, outside of hotels and apartments, Fitch believes the asset type lends itself lower turnover vs multifamily over time, particularly when focused on certain tenants and markets. Positive demographic trends somewhat offset the shorter average-lease-term concerns, especially when compared to other traditional property sectors that may be experiencing secular challenges.
The company has demonstrated access to the debt and equity capital markets, and investor demand for a broader range of capital offerings is expected to be favorable, given wider investor acceptance and interest in the strong growth profile of the property type.
Compared to multifamily peers, where continued GSE support has led to cap rate compression, SFR has a natural buyer pool in the second market for single family homes, supported by attractive, often times government subsidized, mortgage financing.
Fitch rates the IDRs of the parent REIT and subsidiary operating partnership on a consolidated basis, using the weak parent/strong subsidiary approach and open access and control factors, based on the entities operating as a single enterprise with strong legal and operational ties.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
--Annual SS NOI growth of around mid-single digit levels through the forecast period;
--Acquisition spend of $850 million in 2023, $750M in 2024 and $1 billion annually thereafter in 2025-2026;
--Annual capex (inclusive of initial acquisition renovation capex) spend at roughly 13% of revenues;
--Dividend growth rate of roughly 18% in 2023, and 10% annually thereafter.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Fitch's expectation for REIT leverage (net debt excluding preferred/operating EBITDA) to sustain below 6x
--INVH demonstrates and further develops its ability to access unsecured debt capital, including public debt markets, consistent with higher rate peers.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Fitch's expectation for REIT leverage (net debt excluding preferred/operating EBITDA) to stay above 7x;
--Challenged capital markets access that limits the company's ability to transition to a primarily unsecured borrowing strategy;
--Unencumbered Assets/Unsecured Debt ratio sustaining below 2x.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Solid Liquidity: Fitch calculates INVH's liquidity coverage was 2.4x for the July 1, 2023 to Dec. 31, 2024 period as the company has no upcoming debt maturities until 2026. As of June 30, 2023, the company had $414 million of cash on hand and full availability under its $1 billion revolving facility.
Subsequent to 2Q23 end, INVH purchased 1,900 homes for $650 million, which was funded through a mix of cash and $150 million drawn on the revolver. Post transaction, INVH went to market with two senior unsecured notes issuances totaling $800 million. Use of proceeds included revolver paydown and general corporate purposes.
Fitch defines liquidity coverage as sources of liquidity divided by uses of liquidity. Sources include unrestricted cash, availability under unsecured revolving credit facilities and retained cash flow from operating activities after dividends. Uses include pro rata debt maturities, expected recurring capex and forecast (re)development costs.
ISSUER PROFILE
Invitation Homes (INVH) is a real estate investment trust (REIT) that owns and operates single-family residential properties for lease. The company owns over 82,000 homes for lease in 16 markets in the U.S.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Invitation Homes Inc.
LT IDRBBB Affirmed
BBB 
Invitation Homes Operating Partnership LP
LT IDRBBB Affirmed
BBB 
senior unsecured
LTBBB Affirmed
BBB 
