Fitch Upgrades WaterBridge Midstream Operating's IDR to 'B'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - New York - 22 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded WaterBridge Midstream Operating LLC's (WATOPE) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to 'B' from 'B-'. The senior secured rating has also been upgraded to 'B+'/'RR3' from 'B'/'RR3'. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
The upgrade is driven by WATOPE's strong performance in 2022 continuing into 1H23 benefitting from continued strong producer activity on WATOPE's acreage. As produced water volumes have grown, WATOPE achieved EBITDA leverage below 7x at YE 2022 while maintaining interest coverage above 2.0x. Additionally, WATOPE in the spring of 2023 extended the expiration date of its revolving credit facility to June 2025. Concerns include preferred issuances above WATOPE which have terms which require, for credit maintaining quality, management to be pro-active with liquidity toward the end of the Outlook horizon, the company's small size, and concentration within the Delaware Basin.
The Stable Outlook reflects Fitch's expectations of steady volume performance in line with Fitch's price deck (which is constructive compared to past price decks, yet features a contango more pronounced than the forwards prices seen in the recent period).
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Improved Leverage and Coverage Metrics: WATOPE's performance through 2Q23 has benefited from continued steady producer activity on the company's dedicated acreage in the Southern Delaware Basin and from the execution of new commercial agreements. Fitch calculates WATOPE's LTM 2Q23 imputed EBITDA leverage (inclusive of the preferred equity in the capital structure) is approximately 6.5x as WATOPE continues to generate positive FCF. Fitch anticipates WATOPE's Delaware producer customers will continue their drilling programs near current levels over the near-to-medium term, supporting continued deleveraging into the low 6x range by YE23.
Interest rates have continued to rise in 2023, but EBITDA interest coverage has remained solid. Fitch calculates WATOPE's LTM 2Q23 EBITDA interest coverage to be approximately 2.3x. WATOPE does not have interest rate hedges and is exposed to rising variable rates. By YE23, EBITDA interest coverage is expected to continue to decline closer to 2.0x if WATOPE does not use it's FCF to prepay a portion of the term loan in an amount above the 1% required amortization.
Near-Term Liquidity Issues Resolved: WATOPE has successfully taken steps to address near-term liquidity overhangs. In June, WATOPE successfully completed an amendment of the credit agreement to extend the maturity of its revolver by one year to June 2025. Fitch notes the revolver size was reduced earlier this year to $85 million, but does not anticipate the smaller revolver to be restrictive to WATOPE's regular working capital or capex budget.
By exchanging the Series A-1 Preferred Units in 2022, the potential for early expiration and maturity of the revolver and term loan (respectively) in September 2023 has been resolved. Additionally, the put right provision held by the owner of the new Series A-1 preferred units has been extended to mid-2025 presenting a medium-term liquidity constraint to be addressed over the next 12 months-17 months.
Volumetric Risk: WATOPE is benefitting from the steady production growth in the Delaware basin which has continued through 1H23 and Fitch expects to continue in 2H23. While fixed-fee contracts provide protection from direct commodity price exposure, volumes have indirect price risk in the event drilling on WATOPE's dedicated acreage becomes uneconomic and customers decide to move rigs elsewhere.
Producer activity in the Delaware basin is primarily driven by the price of WTI oil prices. Production in the Arkoma basin is driven by natural gas prices which have fallen more sharply than WTI oil prices, leading to the shut-in of 50 wells in the basin in 2Q23. The majority of WATOPE's volumes and revenues are generated in the Delaware basin with a smaller contribution from the Arkoma by comparison.
WATOPE does not have a material amount of minimum volume commitments (MVCs) that would protect cash flows in a case where production moves off of WATOPE's acreage dedications. Fitch expects the southern Delaware basin volume growth to remain robust through 2023, yet as recent history has shown us in 2020, producers can quickly slow or stop production and WATOPE's volumes will be impacted with little protection.
Expanding Delaware Basin Commercial Agreements: Despite the decline of hydrocarbon pricing from robust 2022 levels, producers have continued drilling plans in the Delaware basin. Through 1H23 WATOPE was active in adding new and expanding existing commercial agreements with producers in the Delaware basin including Continental Resources Inc. (BBB/Stable). Most of the other recently signed new agreements are with private equity owned exploration and production companies not rated by Fitch. In addition to signing new customers, WATOPE is in ongoing discussions to consolidate and expand Chevron Corporation's (not rated) dedicated acreage in the southern Delaware basin following recent M&A.
Customer Concentration: WATOPE has acreage dedications with several large investment grade customers and is modestly diversified compared to pure-play gathering peers. The company is exposed to customer concentration as its three largest customers accounted for approximately 48% of revenues in 2022. M&A activity has remained active over the past few years which is an overall positive for WATOPE's counterparty credit profile. Nearly all of WATOPE's producer contracts are fixed fee with CPI escalators, an exception being Trinity Operating (USG) LLC, (Trinity; NR but a subsidiary of Nextra Energy, Inc. [A-/Stable]). WATOPE and Trinity have made adjustments from time to time to seek win-win outcomes.
Limited Scale & Size: WATOPE is a water midstream/solutions provider that operates predominantly in the southern Delaware region of the Permian basin, with a small percentage of operations in the Arkoma basin in Oklahoma. Given the predominant single basin focus and lack of business line diversity, WATOPE possesses outsized sensitivity to a slow-down in Delaware basin production as materialized in 2020. Fitch expects WATOPE to generate annual EBITDA less than $300 million over the forecast consistent with issuers below the 'BB-' rating category.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
WATOPE is somewhat unique in the midstream sector in that it is a pure play water solutions business. In terms of customer concentration WATOPE has good diversification with a mix of investment grade and non-investment grade producers. Fitch acknowledges WATOPE has some basin diversity with operations in the Arkoma basin in Oklahoma, but the majority of EBITDA is generated from its operations in the Southern Delaware Basin.
Geographically similar to WATOPE, Medallion Midland Acquisition, L.P (B+/Stable) is a Permian Basin focused midstream services company. Medallion's operations focus on crude oil gathering and transportation within Texas which differ from WATOPE's produced water disposal activities. Like WATOPE, Medallion is also subject to volumetric risk, although Medallion does not have any direct commodity price exposure and has some MVCs. WATOPE also has some exposure related to the sale of skim oil which has comparatively higher direct commodity price exposure. Fitch regards WATOPE as having higher business risk compared to Medallion.
Within the Permian basin Medallion operates in Midland sub-basin. WATOPE only has operations in the Delaware basin with some diversity to the Arkoma basin in Oklahoma. Fitch takes a more constructive view on long-term volumes in the Midland than in Oklahoma. Like WATOPE Medallion's ratings are limited by its relatively small size with EBITDA generation below $300 million and customer diversification is modest.
The driving force in one-notch the rating differences between the two companies is the difference in financial metrics. Fitch expects Medallion to achieve its leverage at or below 4.0x in 2023 comparing favorably to WATOPE's significantly higher leverage profile.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
Fitch's Key Assumptions Within Our Rating Case for the Issuer
--Fitch price deck, e.g., 2024 prices of West Texas Intermediate of $70 per barrel, and Henry Hub of $3.50 per thousand cubic feet;
--Delaware produced water annual volume growth in the mid 20% range for 2023, then tapering off in latter forecast years;
--Capex spending in line with management's expectations;
--Base interest rate applicable to the revolving credit facility and term loan reflects the Fitch Global Economic Outlook, e.g., 5.75% for 2023, 4.25% for 2024, and 3.25% in 2025 e.g.;
--Excess FCF used to pay down outstanding revolver borrowings in 2023 and partial term loan repayment beginning in 2024;
--The recovery analysis uses assumptions that cause WaterBridge to be considered a going-concern in bankruptcy. Fitch has assumed a 10% administrative claim (standard). The going-concern EBITDA estimate of around $135 million, reflects Fitch's view of a sustainable, post-reorganization EBITDA level upon which we base the valuation of the company. As per criteria, the going concern EBITDA reflects some residual portion of the distress that caused the default;
--Fitch used a 6.0x EBITDA multiple is in line with reorganization multiples for the energy sector. There have been limited bankruptcy and reorganizations within the midstream space but two bankruptcies, Azure Midstream and Southcross Holdings LP (2016) had multiples between 5.0x and 7.0x, ascertained by Fitch's best efforts attempts at devising estimates.
More recently, yet away from the midstream sub-sector of Energy, in its recent Bankruptcy Case Study Report, "Energy, Power and Commodities Bankruptcies Enterprise Value and Creditor Recoveries" published in September 2021, the median enterprise valuation exit multiplies for 51 energy cases for which this data was available was 5.3x, with a wide range of multiples observed.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--EBITDA leverage expected to be below 6.0x on a sustained basis;
--Improved circumstances concerning liquidity.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Lack of pro-active management of liquidity, including but not limited extension/repayment of revolver set to mature in 2025 and plan to address preferred equity put-right provision six months to a year prior to June 2025;
--EBITDA leverage expected to be above 7.0x on a sustained basis;
--EBITDA interest coverage below 2.0x on a sustained basis;
--Volume declines (trailing quarterly) in WATOPE's Delaware basin system, except if caused by one-off events;
--A significant event at a major customer that will probably impair WATOPE's cash flow.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Adequate Near-Term Liquidity: Fitch views WATOPE's liquidity as sufficient over the next 12 months-17 months. Mid-term liquidity restrictions remain as the Series A-1 preferred units contain a put-right provision the owner could exercise as early July 2025.
As of June 30, 2023, WATOPE had approximately $101 million of liquidity consisting of available revolver borrowings and cash and cash equivalents. The company has a super-senior revolving credit facility, which was downsized to $85 million from $100 million in 1Q23, which is currently has approximately $10 million of outstanding borrowings.
In June 2023, WATOPE successfully extended the revolver maturity to June 2025. The revolving credit facility has a springing net leverage covenant of 5.0x with any incremental draw above $45 million. As the net leverage covenant was below 5.0x at quarter end, WATOPE's revolver borrowings are no longer limited to $45 million.
The term loan has a maturity date of June 2026 and requires a standard mandatory amortization of 1% of original loan amount per annum and compliance with a debt service coverage ratio covenant threshold of 1.1x. The company was in compliance with its financial covenants as of June 30, 2023. Fitch expects WATOPE to maintain compliance with its covenants through the forecast period.
ISSUER PROFILE
WaterBridge Midstream Operating, LLC provides water services to oil & gas producers in Texas and Oklahoma.
SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL ADJUSTMENTS
Owing to the change of control provision in the preferred units, among other terms that tip the judgment the same way, the preferred units receive zero equity credit (i.e., are treated like debt for purposes of calculating leverage). WATOPE is deemed to have as imputed debt-like instruments two series of preferred units. As to calculations of coverage metrics, PIK distributions and future value claims for deferred coupons are excluded.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
WaterBridge Midstream Operating LLC has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Group Structure due to related party transactions with affiliate companies, which has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the rating[s] in conjunction with other factors.
WaterBridge Midstream Operating LLC has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Financial Transparency due to private equity ownership resulting in less structural and financial disclosure transparency than publicly traded issuers, which has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the rating[s] in conjunction with other factors.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
RECOVERY  
PRIOR  
WaterBridge Midstream Operating LLC
LT IDRB Upgrade


B- 
senior secured
LTB+ Upgrade
RR3

B 
