Fitch Revises Smurfit Kappa Group's Outlook to Positive; Affirms at 'BBB-'

Fitch Ratings - Warsaw - 31 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has revised the Outlook on Ireland-based packaging company Smurfit Kappa Group plc's (SKG) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) to Positive from Stable and affirmed the IDR at 'BBB-'. A full list of ratings is below.
The revision of the Outlook reflects SKG's strong and highly resilient business model, despite a difficult economic environment, and its sustained relative power across its value chain. This is evidenced by limited margin volatility compared with peers in times of high inflation and a temporary decline in volumes arising from destocking.
We believe the free cash flow (FCF) margin will improve to around 2% in 2024 following the completion of high capex by end-2023. Fitch believes the margin is characterised by stability and a conservative capital allocation policy. This prioritises investments in organic growth and asset efficiency, which support the business model, while providing sufficient resources for dividends and small to medium-sized acquisitions.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Stronger Business Model: In our view, SKG's business model has been strengthened by a number of regular investments and acquisitions to support the integrated business model and deliver revenue growth. As a result, we believe SKG's increased scale, combined with high levels of input-material self-sufficiency, have allowed the group to enhance its relative power across its value chain. Accordingly, the business model provides margin stability, despite the weaker economic environment, differentiating SKG from its peers.
Limited Margin Volatility: Fitch's adjusted EBITDA in 2022 reached 17%, compared with 16% the agency previously expected. The 1H23 margin improved to 17.7%, but we expect stabilisation at around 17% over the forecast period. Nonetheless, it represents an incremental improvement of around 0.5pp compared with the last five-year average or 2pp from the last 10-year average. Despite the current inflationary environment and declining volumes, margins have remained more resilient in 2023 than peers. This is due to investments in production efficiency, well-managed energy sourcing and hedging, a strong pass through mechanism and valued-added packaging mix.
Effective Financial Policy Adherence: Fitch views SKG's financial policy as a core for underpinning an investment-grade rating. The company's net leverage target of 1.5x-2.0x (similar to Fitch's equivalent) is somewhat tighter than Stora Enso Oyj's (BBB-/Stable) of less than 2x. Unlike Stora or Sappi Limited (BB+/Stable), SKG is not exposed to the declining paper industry (and their related expensive product mix structural change), so cash is directly allocated to growth and efficiency.
While we assume EUR100 million for acquisitions, a larger acquisition is possible, given sufficient leverage headroom (1.4x at end June 2023). In this scenario, we would expect temporary modest changes in leverage, remaining in line with the leverage target.
Strong Leverage Metrics: Fitch forecasts SKG's leverage at around 1.4x-1.3x in 2023-2025 compared with the positive rating sensitivity of 1.5x. It represents a slight increase from the exceptional 1.2x at end-2022, albeit still in line with Fitch's expectations for a potential 'BBB' rating. Fitch believes sustained low leverage is supported by limited EBITDA volatility and financial discipline.
FCF Trajectory Drivers: SKG's FCF generation was burdened by high capex and working-capital consumption in 2021-2022. However, actual FCF margins (-0.1% and 1.1%, respectively) were stronger than Fitch's previous expectations for the period. We expect an FCF margin of 0.7% in 2023 before it improves to around 2% on completion of higher investment capex in 2024. Fitch's FCF expectations for 2024 and beyond are weaker than SKG reported in 2019-2020.
We believe that with the acquisition of the Verzuolo plant in 2021, capex intensity increased to nearly 7.5% of sales compared with 7%-6% in 2019-2020. However, this has improved SKG's integrated operating model and security of raw-material supply. Working capital management also affects FCF margins and we believe working capital will normalise with lower energy and box prices.
Strong Long-Term Demand: Inflation continues to erode consumer confidence, which we expect will contribute to weaker box volumes in 2023, although we expect normal growth patterns to resume from 2024 following the additional destocking impacts. SKG's good geographical diversification allows it to manage demand imbalances. Packaging recyclability increasingly matters to producers of merchandising products and their consumers. We believe plastic substitution is an additional long-term volume driver as long as paper packaging meets specific criteria (e.g. durability, non-liquid, convenience in usage).
Leading Packaging Company: SKG's rating is supported by its leading position in corrugated containers and exposure to broadly stable packaging markets. The credit profile is further supported by SKG's vertical integration into containerboard, providing supply chain security and some margin protection against raw-material cost inflation. In addition, around 70%-75% of its revenue is generated by customers in the fast-moving consumer goods sector, which provides SKG's financial performance with stability.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
SKG's strong market position continues to be bolstered by continuing investment and bolt-on acquisitions in its core European and Americas markets. It is also exposed to favourable long-term market dynamics supporting growth in more easily recyclable substrates (including fibre).
SKG's closest Fitch-rated peer is Stora, which benefits from slightly better geographical diversification and a wider product mix, albeit with some exposure to the declining paper industry (expected a 10% share in 2023 revenue). The 1H23 results showed Stora is facing a number of weaknesses, with destocking and declining prices resulting in a lower EBITDA margin of 12.7% expected by Fitch at end-2023 compared with 17% for SKG. A number of corrugated/fibre-based packaging companies experience the same including SKG. However, SKG remains well positioned with its margins relative to the broader industry.
Stora's FCF margins will be heavily affected by lower EBITDA margins and high capex in 2023-2024, which is being spent on the conversion of a paper mill in Finland, among other things, and leads to higher debt and leverage. Sappi is also converting its paper mills into a packaging machine to shift away from the declining paper industry. While long-term and expensive conversion is not a risk for SKG, its high capex in 2021-2023 on a number of small growth and efficiency projects make FCF generation more sustainable. High exposure to non-cyclical sectors and limited volatility of EBITDA margins compared with Stora and Sappi also contribute to FCF sustainability.
SKG's and Stora's financial profiles were very similar in 2021-2022. With the recent negative dynamics in Stora's figures, SKG is now stronger with EBITDA net leverage of 1.4x-1.3x compared with Stora's 2.5x in 2023-2024. US-based packaging peers, such as Berry Global Group, Inc. (BB+/Stable), slightly larger than SKG, and Silgan Holdings Inc. (BB+/Stable), smaller than SKG, operate in different packaging segments (plastic and metal packaging) and exhibit different market dynamics and customer mix. The leverage profile of US-based packaging companies is weaker than that of SKG and more in line with non-investment-grade ratings.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
- Revenue to decrease around 10.7% in 2023 and 1.5% in 2024 due to decreased volumes and prices. Revenue growth turning positive in 2025
- EBITDA margin around 16.9% in 2023 and 2024 and 17.1% in 2025-2026
- Average dividend growth at around 9% in 2023 and 5% annually to 2026
- Acquisitions of EUR56 million in 2023 and EUR100 million annually to 2026
- Capex at around 9.5% of revenue in 2023 due to the investment plan before normalising to 7.4-7.2% in 2024-2026
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Developments That May, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Positive Rating Action/Upgrade
- Increased geographic diversification leading to reduced business risk
- EBITDA net leverage below 1.5x
- FCF margin trending 2.0%
Developments That May, Individually or Collectively, Lead to Negative Rating Action/Downgrade
- Larger-than-expected acquisitions or increased shareholder returns that result in EBITDA net leverage above 2.5x on a sustained basis
- FCF margin sustainably below 1.5%
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Strong Liquidity Position: At end June-2023, SKG had EUR504 million in Fitch-adjusted cash and equivalents (i.e. after deduction of EUR111 million for intra-year working-capital and other operational requirements based on 2022 financial statements), EUR1.346 billion of availability under its sustainability-linked revolving credit facility due in January 2026 and its two sustainability-linked securitisation programmes of EUR312 million in total due in 2026.
We forecast FCF to be pressured from the ongoing investment plan in 2023 before it improves to 2.0% of revenue in 2024 and 1.8% in 2025-2026. We expect working capital changes to normalise on lower volumes in 2023 and input prices.
SKG has an evenly balanced debt maturity profile with the nearest maturity in February 2025 for its EUR250 million 2.75% notes and November 2025 for its USD292.3 million 7.5% notes, which we believe are likely to be easily repaid with own liquidity sources or refinanced.
ISSUER PROFILE
SKG is a leading manufacturer of paper-based packaging products with operations across 22 countries in Europe,13 in the Americas and one in Africa. With more than EUR12 billion revenues in 2022, it is the European leader in corrugated packaging and containerboard selling mainly to producers of fast-moving consumer goods.
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
SKG has an ESG Relevance Score of '4[+]' for exposure to social impacts as it benefits from the ongoing consumer preference shift to paper and cardboard packaging, away from plastic packaging, and customer demand for more sustainable packaging solutions. In addition, SKG benefits from ongoing growth of e-commerce that requires specific packaging.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Smurfit Kappa Treasury Funding Designated Activity Company
   senior unsecured
LTBBB- Affirmed
BBB- 
Smurfit Kappa Acquisitions Unlimited Company
   senior unsecured
LTBBB- Affirmed
BBB- 
Smurfit Kappa Treasury Unlimited Company
   senior unsecured
LTBBB- Affirmed
BBB- 
Smurfit Kappa Group plc
LT IDRBBB- Affirmed
BBB- 
