Fitch Upgrades Hess to 'BBB'; Outlook Stable

Fitch Ratings - Chicago - 23 Aug 2023: Fitch Ratings has upgraded Hess Corporation's (NYSE: HES) Long-Term Issuer Default Rating (IDR) and senior unsecured ratings to 'BBB' from 'BBB-'. The Rating Outlook is Stable.
The main drivers of the upgrade are the successful execution of additional phases of low cost, high-margin Guyana production and good visibility on additional Guyana phases coming online over the near-to-medium term. These phases, in conjunction with debottlenecking efforts, support a trajectory of significant production and cash flow growth over the next several years, as well as expected de-leveraging and credit metrics improvement through top-line growth.
KEY RATING DRIVERS
Guyana Progress: Hess' main growth platform, Guyana (30% working interest, Exxon operated), remains on schedule. The third development Payara (220kbopd gross) is anticipated online later this year, with an expected contribution of 15kbopd in Q4. The fourth development Yellowtail (250kbopd) is 60% complete and on track for first oil in 2025, while the fifth development Uara (also 250kbopd) was sanctioned in April and is on track for 2026. Hess plans at least six floating production, storage and offloading vessels (FPSOs) by 2027, with the potential for up to 10 FPSOs from the Stabroek block. Guyana's low cost phases ($25-$35/boe breakeven) are expected to contribute to Hess' industry leading cash flow and production growth over the next several years.
Bakken Picks Up: Bakken activity also picked up in line with higher oil prices. After cutting the Bakken to one rig in the pandemic, the company added a fourth rig last July. Q223 Bakken production rose to 181kboepd, well above guidance of 165-170kboepd. About half the gains were due to stronger operational performance and half to higher volume entitlements in a lower price environment. Bakken production is flexible, but the midstream tariffs paid to HESM (approximately $1.2 billion 2022) create incentives to maintain production to optimize unit economics. Hess' target production for Bakken is 200kboepd. The company has a 15-year inventory of Bakken drilling locations.
Increased Guidance: Based on the above factors, Hess raised FY production guidance for 2023 to the 385-390kboepd level, a 15-20kboepd increase from previous guidance. As of Q223, Hess' consolidated leverage (including results from higher levered midstream entity HESM) was a healthy 1.6x.
Near-Term FCF Limited: Hess' growth profile differentiates it from most E&P peers. While Guyana continues to ramp up, the combination of higher capex and moderating oil prices may delay positive FCF. Capex guidance for 2023 is $3.7 billion, but Fitch anticipates this will rise further in 2024, given spending on larger sized Guyana phases, plans to purchase (rather than lease) the Unity FPSO, as well as inflation impacts. As calculated by Fitch, Hess' FCF (including dividends) was -$113 million in Q223.
Debt Repayment Mostly Complete: After repaying the remainder of the term loan taken out during the pandemic to ensure expansion capex would be funded, Fitch expects discretionary debt repayments at the Hess parent level will be limited, and anchored on maturities as they come due. As a result, most of the improvement in company credit metrics is expected to come from the effects of a growing production base.
Capital Allocation: With most planned debt repayments behind it, Hess has committed to sending up to 75% of adjusted FCF (after capex and debt repayments) to shareholder return. In March the company announced a 17% increase in its dividend and approved authorization for a new $1 billion repurchase program. In 1H23, Hess paid out $271 million in dividends and settled $20 million in share repurchases.
ARO Spending Lower: Hess' asset retirement spending is elevated in the near term (current portion of ARO was $241 million as of Q223) but is set to decline substantially thereafter as it completes most of the remediation work associated with the Fieldwood bankruptcy under chain of title obligations. In Q2, the company recognized an $82 million pre-tax charge linked to Fieldwood's West Delta Field. Hess' hedge profile is also modest. The company hedged 130kbopd in 2023, including 80kbopd at $70 WTI with puts, and another 50kbopd with $75 Brent puts. Hess does not have a multi-year hedge program.
Midstream Monetization: YTD, Hess monetized approximately $267 million of its holdings in Hess Midstream LP (HESM), reducing its stake in HESM to 38%. Hess has aggressively sold down non-core assets over the past several years, which may limit the scope of future sales. Future sales could include additional liquidation of its HESM stake.
Incremental Flexibility Adequate: Fitch believes the financial flexibility the company has to deal with a future leg down in prices is adequate, and the levers the company is most likely to pull include reduced shareholder returns and additional capex cuts. Fitch does not expect the company would drop to zero rigs in the Bakken for a prolonged period given its desire to preserve its lean manufacturing capabilities, as well as the previously stated need to pay midstream tariffs. In addition, Hess could lower its capex by deferring future buyouts of FPSOs.
DERIVATION SUMMARY
Hess is reasonably positioned versus investment-grade peers in the independent E&P space. In terms of size, at 387kboepd (2Q23) it is comparable to peers Apache Corporation (399kboepd), Marathon Oil Corporation (400kboepd), but smaller than peers Ovintiv (573kboepd), and Devon (662kboepd). Liquids exposure is above average at around 74%, and includes a high percentage of oil versus natural gas liquids given the high oil content in core Guyana and Bakken plays. Hess' oil and natural gas pricing realizations also benefit from its long-term, oil-linked Malaysian production sharing contracts as well as Brent-linked Guyana pricing. Diversification is above average both in terms of upstream (Bakken, GoM, Guyana, Asia), and its 38% stake in midstream entity HESM, although Guyana will be an increasing portion of total upstream production
Cash netbacks ($22.5/boe) are in line with Marathon ($25.1/boe) but below Devon ($27.4/boe) and Pioneer ($34.1/boe). Fitch expects Hess' netbacks will improve as it adds low-cost Guyana phases. Hess' emphasis on growth in Guyana differentiates it from most peers who have chosen to lower near-term reinvestment rates and boost FCF. Hess' reinvestment phase is set to extend over the next few years, although it should become increasingly FCF positive as its growing production base incorporates new Guyana phases.
KEY ASSUMPTIONS
--Base Case WTI oil price of $75 in 2023, $70 in 2024, $65 in 2025, $60 in 2026, and $57 in 2027 and beyond;
--Henry Hub natural gas prices of $3.00/mcf in 2023, $3.50 in 2024, $3.00 in 2025, and $2.75 in 2026 and beyond;
--Forecast production of 386kboepd in 2023, 440k in 2024, and 483k in 2025; 548k in 2026, and 590k in 2027;
--$300 million in 2024 notes Hess parent level repaid;
--Excess FCF allocated to shareholder returns, with a focus on buybacks over dividends;
--No incremental asset sales assumed beyond YTD midstream monetization.
RATING SENSITIVITIES
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to positive rating action/upgrade:
--Material increase in size and scale with production comfortably above 600kboepd;
--Consolidated midcycle EBITDA leverage below 1.5x while maintaining a conservative financial policy.
Factors that could, individually or collectively, lead to negative rating action/downgrade:
--Sustained operational issues in key basin or material unfavorable change in fiscal terms in Guyana;
--Failure to maintain conservative financial policy;
--Consolidated mid-cycle EBITDA leverage above 2.0x.
BEST/WORST CASE RATING SCENARIO
International scale credit ratings of Non-Financial Corporate issuers have a best-case rating upgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a positive direction) of three notches over a three-year rating horizon; and a worst-case rating downgrade scenario (defined as the 99th percentile of rating transitions, measured in a negative direction) of four notches over three years. The complete span of best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings for all rating categories ranges from 'AAA' to 'D'. Best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings are based on historical performance. For more information about the methodology used to determine sector-specific best- and worst-case scenario credit ratings, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/site/re/10111579.
LIQUIDITY AND DEBT STRUCTURE
Good Liquidity: Hess' liquidity was good at June 30, 2023, with consolidated cash & equivalents of $2.23 billion (of which $4 million was held at Hess Midstream), and $3.25 billion in unsecured revolver capacity (expiry July 2027), for pro forma liquidity of $5.48 billion. Hess also had availability of $98 million on committed lines of $187 million, following LOC use of $89 million. HESM's $1.0 billion revolver is non-recourse to Hess parent and is excluded.
Fitch views the company's liquidity position as good in the context of a manageable maturity wall, with no parent maturities due until the company's 2024 $300 million 3.5% notes. Financial covenants of the main SOFR-based revolver are substantially similar to the previous revolver, and include a 65% debt to total capitalization covenant (which stood at 35.1% at June 30, 2023), and a cap on potential secured debt issuance of 15% Consolidated Net Tangible Assets.
ISSUER PROFILE
Hess Corporation is a mid-sized global E&P with upstream operations in Guyana, the U.S. onshore (Bakken), U.S. offshore, and Asia (Malaysia/Thailand Joint Development Area). Hess also owns a 38% ownership stake in Hess Midstream Operations LP (HESM).
REFERENCES FOR SUBSTANTIALLY MATERIAL SOURCE CITED AS KEY DRIVER OF RATING
The principal sources of information used in the analysis are described in the Applicable Criteria.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Hess Corporation has an ESG Relevance Score of '4' for Waste & Hazardous Materials Management; Ecological Impacts due to its exposure to the financial risks that an offshore oil spill poses for moderate-sized offshore operators, as well as higher remediation costs associated with offshore platforms. This factor has a negative impact on the credit profile, and is relevant to the ratings in conjunction with other factors.
Fitch lowered Hess' ESG Relevance Score for Group Structure from '4' to '3'. While Hess continues to have a complex structure linked to its midstream entity, Hess Midstream (HESM), the materiality of HESM to the parent's overall credit profile and cash flows has declined in the face of rapid growth of the main upstream business, as well as dilutions in Hess' ownership stake in HESM.
The highest level of ESG credit relevance is a score of '3', unless otherwise disclosed in this section. A score of '3' means ESG issues are credit-neutral or have only a minimal credit impact on the entity, either due to their nature or the way in which they are being managed by the entity. Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores are not inputs in the rating process; they are an observation on the relevance and materiality of ESG factors in the rating decision. For more information on Fitch's ESG Relevance Scores, visit https://www.fitchratings.com/topics/esg/products#esg-relevance-scores.
RATING ACTIONS
ENTITY / DEBT  
RATING  
PRIOR  
Hess Corporation
LT IDRBBB Upgrade
BBB- 
senior unsecured
LTBBB Upgrade
BBB- 
