Moody's affirms GXO Logistics' Ba1 CFR; outlook to positive from stable
NOTE: On September 1, 2023, the press release was corrected as follows: in the Regulatory Disclosures section, disclosure language not applicable to this rating action was removed. Revised release follows. 
New York, August 23, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) changed the outlook for GXO Logistics, Inc.'s ("GXO") to positive from stable. Moody's also affirmed the company's Ba1 corporate family rating, Ba1-PD probability of default rating and Ba1 senior unsecured notes rating. The speculative grade liquidity rating was upgraded to SGL-1 from SGL-2.
The positive outlook reflects Moody's expectation that GXO's improved credit metrics and very good liquidity will be sustained. Moody's expects that the company's current positive momentum in operating results will continue well into 2024 as new contract wins should offset increasing labor costs and capital expenditure requirements. Further, Moody's expects that GXO will continue its strategy of maintaining low financial leverage, a modest appetite for M&A, and sufficient liquidity to address the cyclicality in the markets it serves. As part of that strategy, Moody's expects the company will continue to invest appropriately in its operations and manage the risks around its diverse end-market customers, which are exposed to  diverse regional developments and economic cycles.
Upgrades:
..Issuer: GXO Logistics, Inc.
....Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Upgraded to SGL-1 from SGL-2
Affirmations:
..Issuer: GXO Logistics, Inc.
....Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed Ba1
....Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed Ba1-PD
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed Ba1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: GXO Logistics, Inc.
....Outlook, Changed To Positive From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The ratings reflect GXO's significant scale and competitive position internationally in logistics services. The company benefits from the secular growth of e-commerce and positive growth trends in logistics outsourcing that will support organic growth. In addition, Moody's recognizes that GXO's contract logistics business is a leading worldwide provider of a range of services and among the largest in North America, U.K. and Europe for e-fulfillment, including reverse logistics. Furthermore, the contract logistics business is expected to be stable, and GXO benefits from its operations serving different end markets as well as its diverse customer base.
With GXO's significant geographic scale, Moody's does not foresee large acquisitions. However, small to medium sized acquisitions, as the company endeavors to fill in certain service categories and expand geographic coverage are likely. Moody's believes new business wins for GXO will have a positive impact over the next 18-24 months as revenues ramp up. Moody's expects GXO to make ongoing and meaningful investments in its technology infrastructure to support both revenue growth as well as improvement in operating margin over the next few years. Moody's expects operating margin will improve to about 6% and debt-to-EBITDA (Moody's standard adjustments) will approximate 2.5x in 2024.
The SGL-1 speculative grade liquidity rating reflects Moody's expectation that the company will have very good liquidity. Moody's expects liquidity to be more than ample to meet short term funding needs. GXO has a cash balance of $305 million and $799 million available on its $800 million revolving credit facility as of June 2023. Moody's anticipates free cash flow to be in the range of $125 million to $180 million over the next 12 to 18 months after an increase in capital spending. Moody's expects GXO's free cash flow to be used to pay down debt and for strategic acquisitions before any shareholder distributions are considered.
Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) considerations are not material to the rating. GXO's environmental risks reflect its  reliance on natural capital and exposure to carbon transition risks, while social risks related to human capital risk and health and safety. Partially mitigating both these risks is GXO's balanced financial strategies and moderate leverage profile.
The positive outlook reflects Moody's expectation that solid organic revenue growth and new contract wins will drive improved earnings and cash flow that will sustain leverage at about 2.5x. The outlook also includes Moody's expectation that GXO will maintain a conservative financial policy with acquisitions more bolt-on in nature, and future shareholder returns that balance a conservative financial policy.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be upgraded with EBITDA margin sustained around 16%, while also preserving financial flexibility to fund what may be large capital investments to prefund revenue expansion and strong liquidity to manage through the cyclical end-markets. Moody's would also expect the company to achieve debt-to-EBITDA approaching 2.0 times and FFO-to-debt maintained around 30% while continuing to grow the business as planned. Finally, maintenance of a conservative financial policy commensurate with a commitment to an investment grade rating would be necessary for a rating upgrade.
The ratings could be downgraded if GXO's debt-to-EBITDA is sustained above 3.5x, EBITDA margin declines below 10%, or liquidity deteriorates due to weakening end markets or operational challenges. Additionally, if the company engages in a more aggressive financial policy, including substantial debt funded acquisitions and/or shareholder friendly transactions, the ratings could be downgraded.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Surface Transportation and Logistics published in December 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/360641. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
GXO Logistics is a technology enabled business that facilities the management and distribution of goods, order fulfillment, reverse logistics, and other high end supply chain services. The company has long-term contractual relationships with high renewal rates. GXO was spun-off in August 2021 from XPO, Inc. Revenue for the last twelve months ended June 30, 2023 was $9.5 billion.
