Moody's upgrades to Baa1 Iowa Colony Dev. Auth., TX's tax increment ratings; outlook revised to stable
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Iowa Colony Development Authority, TX's tax increment revenue rating to Baa1 from Baa2 and changed the outlook to stable from positive.  Concurrently, Moody's has assigned a Baa1 rating to the authority's Tax Increment Contract Revenue Bonds, Series 2023 with an anticipated par amount of about $7.7 million. Post-sale the authority will have about $34.5 million in tax increment debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade to Baa1 reflects the authority's growing, albeit modestly-sized tax base which is expected to generate strong pledged revenue growth. Although currently narrow debt service coverage will remain due to additional debt plans, the authority's stable and diverse tax base are less prone to volatility and will provide predictably adequate coverage. Finally, the rating incorporates the authority's above average resident income levels and the strength of the local economy including robust housing demand in the greater Houston (Aa3 stable) area.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects our expectation that ongoing residential development will drive strong incremental assessed value growth, offsetting future debt needs of the authority. The authority's tax base is less prone to volatility due to its favorable ratio of incremental value to total value, and a diverse set of taxpayers.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Improved debt service coverage
- Incremental assessed valuation growth that outpaces future debt issuance
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Significant and/or prolonged contraction of incremental assessed valuation
- Reduction in pledged revenues causing weakened debt service coverage levels
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are payable from a pledge of Contract Tax Increment revenues the authority receives from the City of Iowa Colony and Brazoria County. Contract Tax Increment revenues consist of property taxes levied on incremental assessed valuation within the tax increment reinvestment zone above the base year value from 2010. The city will remit 70% of its tax increment collections and the county will remit 40.49% of its tax increment collections. In 2020, the zone annexed a 126 acre area, and the city has agreed to remit tax increment collections generated from the annexed area; however, the county is not participating in the annexed area. The bonds are further payable from 90% of the 1% sales and use tax generated by the city within the zone, as well as a debt service reserve fund, funded at the lesser of 1.25 times average annual debt service or maximum annual debt service.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds of the bonds will be used to reimburse the developer for various infrastructure improvements throughout the zone, including parks, trails, recreation facilities, roadways, landscaping, and other projects that are not eligible for reimbursement by the Brazoria County Municipal Utility District No. 55 (Baa2 stable).
PROFILE
Iowa Colony Development Authority was authorized by the City of Iowa Colony (A1) to promote, develop, encourage and maintain housing, educational facilities, employment, commerce and economic development within the zone. The zone consists of 1,082 acres located entirely within the corporate limits of the city, roughly 24 miles south of Houston. The zone is being developed as a portion of the 2,914 acre master planned community, Meridiana.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Tax Increment Debt Methodology published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393335. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
