Moody's upgrades Maple Heights, OH's issuer and GOLT ratings to Baa2; outlook is stable
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded to Baa2 from Baa3 the City of Maple Heights, OH's issuer and general obligation limited tax (GOLT) ratings. The outlook remains stable. The city currently has roughly $7.8 million in outstanding GOLT debt.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the city's issuer rating to Baa2 reflects a strengthening of its fund balance and liquidity to sound levels through improved budgetary management and rising income tax collections. The rating also considers the city's below-median full value per capita, low resident incomes, and above-average poverty rate. Also taken into account is the city's moderate long-term leverage to revenue ratio and low annual fixed cost burden.
The Baa2 rating assigned to the city's GOLT bonds is at the same level as the issuer rating based on the pledge of the city's full faith and credit towards debt repayment.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects the city's strong track record of operating performance in recent years, leading to reserves that have now surpassed 50% of annual revenue.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Maintenance of healthy reserves over a sustained period
-     Material economic expansion or improved resident income metrics
-     Moderation to the city's long-term leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Material economic contraction including significant declines to income tax collections
-     Sustained narrowing of operating fund balance or liquidity
-     Significant increases to the city's long-term leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The city's outstanding GOLT bonds benefit from its full faith and credit pledge, ensuring their repayment using all available resources at the city's disposal. This includes the collections of ad valorem property taxes, which are subject to the state-imposed 10-mill limitation.
PROFILE
Maple Heights is a suburban community located approximately 10 miles southeast of downtown Cleveland (Aa3 stable). It provides municipal services, including public safety, public works and recreation, to approximately 22,000 residents.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
