Moody's upgrades $427 million of Single-Family Rental RMBS from two transactions
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has upgraded the ratings of four tranches from two transactions, issued by FirstKey Homes, backed by loans secured by a pool of single family rental properties.
Please click on this link https://www.moodys.com/viewresearchdoc.aspx?docid=PBS_ARFTL479978 for the List of Affected Credit Ratings. This list is an integral part of this Press Release and identifies each affected issuer.
The complete rating actions are as follows:
Issuer: FirstKey Homes 2020-SFR1 Trust
Cl. C, Upgraded to Aa1 (sf); previously on Mar 3, 2022 Upgraded to Aa2 (sf)
Cl. D, Upgraded to A2 (sf); previously on Mar 3, 2022 Upgraded to A3 (sf)
Issuer: FirstKey Homes 2020-SFR2 Trust
Cl. C, Upgraded to Aa2 (sf); previously on Mar 3, 2022 Upgraded to Aa3 (sf)
Cl. D, Upgraded to A3 (sf); previously on Mar 3, 2022 Upgraded to Baa1 (sf)
RATINGS RATIONALE
The rating upgrades are driven by the steady build-up of equity in the properties backing the transaction. The transactions have benefited from robust home price appreciation, which has reduced Moody's LTV since closing. Moody's LTV is based on Moody's expected recovery values, which represent the funds expected to be generated by the liquidation of the underlying rental properties in the event the issuer is unable to secure refinancing before the final maturity date and the certificates need to be repaid. We calculate the updated Moody's value by applying the home price appreciation to each property's assigned Moody's Value at closing. The home price appreciation applied to each property is based on metropolitan statistical area (MSA) level data reported by Moody's Analytics.
In addition, strong rental demand and the limited supply of single-family rental properties have increased contractual monthly rents since closing and thus kept overall cashflows steady. The operating net cash flow (NCF) in these transactions has increased from the underwritten NCF at closing, supporting the strong debt-service coverage ratios (DSCR).
Specifically, FirstKey Homes 2020-SFR1 Trust (FKH 2020-SFR1) and FirstKey Homes 2020-SFR2 Trust (FKH 2020-SFR2) have benefited from home price appreciation of approximately 35% and 29% since closing. The robust home price growth has reduced the Moody's LTV to 79%, down from 106% at closing for FKH 2020-SFR1 and to 85%, down from 109% at closing for FKH 2020-SFR2. In addition, average contractual monthly rents have increased by 18% for FKH 2020-SFR1 and 20% for FKH 2020-SFR1 since closing. As of March 2023, for FKH 2020-SFR1, the NCF has increased 17% from closing and increased the actual DSCR to 2.94x, up from a closing DSCR of 2.59x. For FKH 2020-SFR2, the NCF has increased 10% from closing and increased the actual DSCR to 3.06x, up from a closing DSCR of 2.89x.
Our analysis takes into consideration, among other factors, recovery value and sustainable net cash flow of the collateral, the insurance coverage, the property management and servicing arrangement, the third-party review, and the transaction's structural and legal framework.
Principal Methodology
The principal methodology used in these ratings was "Single-Family Rental Securitizations Methodology" published in December 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393138. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com/ for a copy of this methodology.
In addition, Moody's publishes a weekly summary of structured finance credit ratings and methodologies, available to all registered users of our website, https://www.moodys.com/SFQuickCheck.
Factors that would lead to an upgrade or downgrade of the ratings:
Up
Levels of credit protection that are higher than necessary to protect investors against current expectations of loss could drive the ratings of the subordinate bonds up. Losses could decline from Moody's original expectations as a result of a lower number of obligor defaults or appreciation in the value of the mortgaged property securing an obligor's promise of payment. Transaction performance also depends greatly on the US macro economy and housing market.
Down
Levels of credit protection that are insufficient to protect investors against current expectations of loss could drive the ratings down. Losses could rise above Moody's expectations as a result of a higher number of obligor defaults or deterioration in the value of the mortgaged property securing an obligor's promise of payment. Transaction performance also depends greatly on the US macro economy and housing market. Other reasons for worse-than-expected performance include poor servicing, error on the part of transaction parties, inadequate transaction governance and fraud.
Finally, performance of RMBS continues to remain highly dependent on servicer procedures. Any change resulting from servicing transfers or other policy or regulatory change can impact the performance of these transactions. In addition, improvements in reporting formats and data availability across deals and trustees may provide better insight into certain performance metrics such as the level of collateral modifications.
