Moody's assigns Aa3 GOLT and A1 non-tax revenue ratings to Huron, OH's bonds; outlook positive
New York, August 14, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Aa3 GOLT rating to the City of Huron, OH's General Obligation (Limited Tax) Various Purpose Improvement Bonds, Series 2023 with a proposed par amount of about $2 million and an A1 rating to the city's Special Obligation Nontax Revenue Bonds, Series 2023 (Federally Taxable) with a proposed par amount of about $2.3 million. Moody's has also affirmed the city's outstanding issuer and GOLT ratings at Aa3. The outlook is positive. Post-sale the city will have about $17 million in debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Aa3 rating reflects the city's strong operating reserves and liquidity and solid financial management. Long term liabilities are moderate with manageable fixed costs. The primary challenge to the city's credit profile is the MSA's considerably declining GDP, though the strength of the city's economy outpaces the region supported by strong resident income and full value per capita with growing income tax revenue.  
The absence of a distinction between the city's issuer rating and Aa3 GOLT rating is based on the city's pledge of its full faith and credit on the payment of the GOLT bonds.
The non-tax revenue debt is rated A1, one notch below the issuer rating, because of the more limited security (primarily fines, forfeitures and penalties, and licenses and permit fees). Debt service coverage by dedicated nontax revenues is strong.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the likelihood that the city's credit profile will continue to strengthen with the maintenance of strong reserves and continued growth of the local economy.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Maintenance of strong reserves
-     Sustained strengthening of GDP
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Material narrowing of reserves or liquidity
-     Further contraction of the regional economy
-     Growth in long term liabilities or fixed costs
LEGAL SECURITY
The city's GOLT debt, including the Various Purpose Improvement Bonds, Series 2023 bonds, carry its full faith and credit pledge, along with its authority to levy ad valorem property taxes under its state imposed 10-mill limitation.
The Special Obligation Non-tax Revenue Bonds, Series 2023 are payable from non-tax revenues, which includes fines and forfeitures, licenses and permits, interest, intergovernmental aid, and miscellaneous revenue. Additionally, the bonds are expected to be supported by service payments from the city's Sawmill Creek tax increment financing district.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The Various Purpose Improvement Bonds, Series 2023 will finance road improvements and the purchase of land for a park.
The Special Obligation Non-tax Revenue Bonds, Series 2023 will fund improvements at Sawmill Creek Resort, which was recently annexed into the city and permanently refund Economic Development Nontax Revenue Notes, Series 2022 originally issued for improvements at the resort.
PROFILE
The City of  Huron encompasses about 5 square miles in Erie County (Aa2) along the shore of Lake Erie between the city of Toledo (A2 stable) and the city of Cleveland (Aa3 stable). It provides a full range of municipal services, including police, fire and water and electric to about 7,000 residents.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
