Moody's upgrades Saint Peter's University Hospital (NJ) to Baa2; outlook stable
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has today upgraded the rating of Saint Peter's University Hospital, NJ (SPUH) to Baa2 from Baa3 and changed the outlook to stable from positive. There is approximately $114 million of debt outstanding.  
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade to the Baa2 reflects durable high single digit operating cash flow (OCF) margins  which will support increasing capital spend and allow for maintenance of cash reserves at levels that provide for strong days cash on hand. Operating results will be supported by supplemental funding streams, which will be stable, as well as expense reduction and revenue enhancing initiatives. The system's long-standing women and children's service niche will continue to undergird SPUH's regional draw and support volume recovery. Challenges will include the system's location in a competitive multi-hospital system market and very high age of plant as well as its large exposure to Medicaid and reliance on supplemental funding. Additional challenges include large pension liabilities that will stress adjusted debt metrics.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects the likely maintenance of operating cash flow and cash reserves at current levels.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
- Reduced reliance on supplemental funding and  durable strengthening of operating cash flow margins to at least 10%
- Ability to address capital needs while maintaining liquidity and related metrics
- Continued enterprise growth
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
- Sustained decline in financial performance
- Significant increase in leverage or meaningful decline in cash
LEGAL SECURITY
The obligated group is comprised of Saint Peter's University Hospital. The bonds are secured by gross revenue pledge and a mortgage of certain hospital property in New Brunswick. Debt service coverage ratio covenant of at least 1.25 times is measured on a twelve month rolling date; SPUH will maintain ample headroom.
PROFILE
Saint Peter's University Hospital is the largest component of Saint Peter's Healthcare System, Inc. approximately $587 million (total revenue in fiscal 2022) system located in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Major service lines include women and children's services. Saint Peter's is sponsored by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Metuchen, NJ. The Bishop maintains various reserve powers as the sole corporate member of the Health System.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Not-For-Profit Healthcare published in December 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70886. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
