Moody's upgrades Piner-Olivet USD, CA's issuer rating to Aa2 and existing GOs to Aa1; assigns Aa1 to Series 2023 GOs
New York, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Piner-Olivet Union School District, CA's issuer rating to Aa2 from Aa3 and upgraded the district's outstanding general obligation (GO) debt to Aa1 from Aa2. Concurrently, Moody's has assigned a Aa1 rating to the district's General Obligation Bonds, Election of 2010, Series 2023 to be issued in the estimated amount of $5.965 million.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the issuer rating to Aa2 reflects recent and ongoing tax base growth coupled with an above average and upward trending resident wealth and income profile. The district has a growing local economy in Sonoma County, benefitting from tourism and proximity to both wine country and the San Francisco metropolitan area. The upgrade also reflects the district's trend of strong financial operations, healthy reserves, and manageable inclusive of new debt issuance, pension and other-post employment benefit liabilities. Exposure to wildfire risk is somewhat elevated. The 2017 Santa Rosa wildfires destroyed over 1,400 homes within the district's Coffey Park neighborhood, reducing 2019 assessed valuation and driving enrollment loss in fiscal 2019. However, the tax base has recovered with commercial and residential development and the ongoing rebuild of the destroyed homes driving growth. Enrollment has also stabilized; Diverse educational offerings at its elementary school and four district charter schools have contributed to stable enrollment which grew slightly in the 2022/2023 school year.
The Aa1 rating assigned to the district's general obligation bonds is one notch above the issuer rating reflecting California school district general obligation (GO) bond security features that include the physical separation through a "lockbox" for pledged property tax collections and a security interest created by statute.
RATING OUTLOOK
Moody's does not usually assign outlooks to local governments with this amount of debt.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Substantial and continued growth in enrollment
-     Significant and sustained growth in assessed valuation
-     Maintenance of strong financial position
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Substantial decline in enrollment
-     Material, protracted decline in assessed valuation
-     Deterioration of financial position, including reserves and liquidity
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's general obligation bonds are secured by the district's voter-approved unlimited property tax pledge. Sonoma County, rather than the district, levies, collects and disburses the district's property taxes, including the portion constitutionally restricted to pay debt service on general obligation bonds.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds of the Series 2023 bonds will be applied to finance specific construction and
improvement projects, such as roofing improvements and continued modernization for all schools, that was approved by the voters of the district, and pay costs of issuance of the Series 2023 bonds.
PROFILE
Piner-Olivet Union School District encompasses 24 square miles in Sonoma County, specifically in northwest Santa Rosa (Aa2). As of fiscal 2023, the district provides K-6th grade education to approximately 281 students at its Jack London Elementary School and also operates four charter schools. Total enrollment at the district, including charter school students, is 1,233 students in fiscal 2023.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
