Moody's upgrades Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission's senior lien ratings to Aa3 from A1 and subordinate lien ratings to A2 from A3; outlook revised to stable from positive
New York, August 14, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned an Aa3 rating to the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission's (PTC or Commission) $400 million Turnpike Revenue Bonds, Series A of 2023. At the same time, Moody's has upgraded to Aa3 from A1 the ratings on Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission's outstanding senior lien bonds encompassing $6.4 billion and subordinate lien ratings to A2 from A3 encompassing $6.3 billion. Moody's has revised the outlook to stable from positive.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the Commission's toll revenue bond ratings reflects our view that there is increased certainty that the Commonwealth will not further pressure PTC for non-system needs beyond current expectations given other available sources of funds for other state transportation needs, improving PTC's long-term credit profile. The upgrade also reflects the continued strong willingness to annually adjust rates while effectively managing costs and capital investments to ensure strong forecast financial metrics are maintained. Given continued strong revenue performance, it also incorporates deleveraging as measured by adjusted debt to operating revenues expected over the next several years as the Commission increases the amount of its capital spending funded from future excess cashflow rather than debt.
The Aa3 senior and A2 subordinate lien revenue bond ratings reflect the Commission's strong and well-established market position with a history of strong demand, especially for commercial traffic, coupled with a proven willingness to continue to annually raise toll rates at or above inflation levels to meet targeted financial metrics for over a decade. Annual toll rate increases support the historically rising total debt outstanding that is now forecast to modestly increase as strong revenue growth continues and more capital is forecast to be funded with excess cashflow instead of debt over time. Over the long-term, revenue growth will primarily be driven by toll rate increases as normalized traffic growth will remain below 1% per year. The ratings also reflect the turnpike system's essentiality as a key east-west transportation corridor in the eastern US with a very long operating and tolling history, as well as well-managed financial operations with consistently strong debt service coverage ratios (DSCRs) and a sound liquidity position.
The A2 subordinate lien rating incorporates the weaker legal security with no legal claim on turnpike revenues other than funds on deposit in the General Reserve Fund and the fact that all of the debt issued on this subordinate lien was issued to make annual payments to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) for other transportation needs.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects our expectation that the Commission will continue to implement annual toll rate increases to result in at least DSCRs of 2.0x for senior revenue bonds, 1.3x for subordinate revenue bonds and 1.2x for subordinate special revenue bonds, including the separately secured Motor License Fund (MLF) enhanced subordinate special revenue bonds while maintaining strong liquidity levels over 365 days cash on hand. It also incorporates our expectation of continued deleveraging to below 10.0x adjusted debt to revenues and no further leverage of PTC for non-system needs.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Revenues continue to grow resulting in senior lien net revenue DSCR above 3.0x and subordinate lien net revenue DSCR above 1.75x
- Liquidity remains above 730 days cash on hand
- Total leverage declines to below 4.0x
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Toll increases are not implemented as planned or if traffic, revenues, or liquidity levels consistently fall short of forecast levels
- Senior lien net revenue DSCR falls below 2.0x or subordinate lien net revenue DSCR falls below 1.3x on a sustained basis
- Increased payments to the commonwealth for non-system needs beyond what is currently forecast
- Materially higher than currently forecast additional debt for capital improvements
LEGAL SECURITY
The senior lien bonds have a first lien on net toll revenues of the turnpike after payment of operations and maintenance expenses and by the debt service reserve fund. The rate covenant for the senior bonds is the greater of 130% senior debt service or 100% of maximum annual debt service plus required transfers to the reserve maintenance fund, debt service reserve fund replenishment and certain short-term debt. PTC's senior lien fixed rate bonds, excluding the EB-5 loans, have debt service reserve funds equal to maximum annual debt service (MADS) while the outstanding variable rate bonds and notes do not have a debt service reserve fund. The senior lien additional bonds test is at least 1.75x prior year debt service, or at least 1.3x projected MADS and at least 1.3x projected debt service for two years after the end of capitalized interest.
The subordinate lien bonds do not have a lien on toll revenues or other funds created in the senior indenture and are payable from PTC payments from funds on deposit in the General Reserve Fund, created in the senior lien bond indenture. The subordinate lien debt service reserve fund requirement is funded at the standard three prong test sized at the lesser of MADS, 10% of proceeds, or 125% average annual debt service. The rate covenant for the subordinate bonds is at least 1.15x annual subordinate debt service and 1.00x combined subordinate and special revenue debt service.
USE OF PROCEEDS
The Series A of 2023 proceeds will be used to pay for various capital expenditures, to partially refund all or a portion of the Turnpike Revenue Bonds, Series A of 2012 and Series C of 2013, to refund all of the outstanding Turnpike Revenue Promissory Note (2018 EB-5 Tranche No. 2), to fund the required deposit to the debt service reserve fund and to pay issuance costs.
PROFILE
The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission is an instrumentality of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with the power to construct, operate and maintain the turnpike system and to perform other functions authorized by Act 44. The turnpike system is large as it spans the commonwealth with about 565 route miles, primarily consisting of the 359 mile east-west Mainline connecting the Ohio Turnpike and the New Jersey Turnpike on either end as well as the 110 mile north-south Northeastern Extension that runs from north of Philadelphia to Scranton.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Publicly Managed Toll Roads and Parking Facilities published in May 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/403120. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
