Moody's upgrades FAGE to Ba3; outlook stable
Madrid, September 01, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today upgraded FAGE International S.A.'s (FAGE) Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to Ba3 from B1 and its Probability of Default Rating (PDR) to Ba3-PD from B1-PD. FAGE is an international family-owned business that mainly manufactures and markets Greek yoghurt. Concurrently, the agency has upgraded to Ba3 from B1 the rating of the backed senior unsecured notes due 2026, jointly issued by FAGE International S.A. and Fage USA Dairy Industry, Inc. (FAGE USA), a subsidiary of FAGE. The outlook is maintained as stable.
The rating action follows FAGE's announcement on 24 August 2023 [1] on the outcome of the early tender offer for its 5.625% senior notes due 2026.
"The rating upgrade mainly reflects the significant reduction in FAGE's leverage following the completion of a $107 million tender offer for its backed senior unsecured notes," says Michel Bove, a Moody's AVP-Analyst and lead analyst for FAGE.
"Despite facing market challenges in 2022, the company's operating performance has improved in 2023, due to lower raw material costs, particularly a decrease in milk prices. Consequently, we expect that FAGE's leverage will remain around 1.5x until 2025, comfortably positioning the rating in the Ba3 category," adds Mr. Bove.
Governance considerations have been a key driver of the rating action. Moody's acknowledges that the debt repayment, which follows the early repayments done in 2020 and 2021, demonstrates a reduced appetite for leverage, which is a Financial Strategy and Risk Management consideration under Moody's General Principles for Assessing Environmental, Social and Governance Risks Methodology.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The rating upgrade is mainly attributed to the successful completion of the announced tender offer for $107 million of its remainder $288 million backed senior unsecured notes maturing in 2026. The tender offer was funded using a portion of the company's significant cash on balance sheet, which amounted to $169 million as of June 2023. Furthermore, the tender offer builds upon the previous buyback and cancellation of approximately $132 million in bonds completed between 2020 and 2021. As a result, the company's total outstanding financial debt has been reduced to only $181 million.
The rating upgrade also considers the company's improved operating performance after a challenging 2022. In the first half of 2023, the company benefited from the positive impact of price increases, coupled with a favorable reduction in milk prices, leading to increased margins. The gross profit margin reached approximately 46% (from 31% in 2022), while the reported EBITDA margin stood at around 27% (from 15% in 2022). Although some tightening is expected in the second half of the year, Moody's anticipates that trading conditions will remain stable over the next 12-18 months. This stability is expected to be supported by a recovery in volumes, which can be attributed to the volume package adjustment implemented in 2022 and an increase in advertising spend. However, this positive trend may be partially offset by consumers shifting towards cheaper brands or private labels, particularly in Europe.
According to Moody's forecasts, FAGE's Moody's-adjusted EBITDA is projected to reach close to $145 million in 2023 and hover around $125 million in 2024, following a slight contraction in margins from the highs observed in the first half of 2023. With the reduction in debt, the company's Moody's-adjusted gross leverage is expected to remain around 1.5x over the next 18 months, which comfortably positions the rating at the Ba3 level.
FAGE continues to generate solid cash flow, with approximately $31 million of free cash flow generated in the first half of 2023. The delay of the investment into the new manufacturing facility in the Netherlands, due to regulatory changes, is expected to support free cash flow generation over the next 12-18 months, with free cash flow projected to reach close to $50 million in 2024. However, Moody's anticipates that free cash flow will turn slightly negative in 2025 once the investment for the new manufacturing plant in Europe resumes. The investment in this facility, which has faced multiple delays, is expected to require additional capital expenditures north of $200 million through 2027. Moody's expects that these expenditures will be financed using available cash and cash generated from operating activities, without the need to raise new debt.
The rating also factors in FAGE's small size, modest product and geographical diversification and high brand concentration, and vulnerability to fluctuations in milk prices and foreign currency movements. More positively, the rating is supported by FAGE's solid positioning in some core market segments, underpinned by the strength of its brand and premium positioning.
LIQUIDITY
FAGE has good liquidity over the next 12-18 months. As of June 2023, the company had $64 million in cash and cash equivalents, pro-forma for the $107 million tender offer. In addition, FAGE has a $35 million fully available committed ABL facility maturing in 2026. FAGE has no debt maturities until 2026, when the outstanding $181 million backed senior unsecured notes become due. The ABL facility includes a springing covenant tested if the facility is drawn by at least 85% based on a fixed charge coverage ratio of at least 1.1x. Moody's expects the company to have adequate capacity under this covenant.
Moody's forecasts the company will generate positive free cash flow in 2023 and 2024. However, the company will have to demonstrate its ability to maintain its good liquidity during its capital spending plan starting 2025, when the investment on the new manufacturing facility resumes.
STRUCTURAL CONSIDERATIONS
FAGE's debt capital structure includes the outstanding $181 million of backed senior unsecured notes due 2026, jointly issued by FAGE and FAGE USA, a subsidiary of FAGE. The senior unsecured notes are guaranteed by FAGE Greece Dairy Industry Single Member S.A. (FAGE Greece). The backed senior unsecured notes are rated Ba3, in line with the company's CFR, given the absence of material secured debt in FAGE's capital structure. The backed senior unsecured notes rank pari passu with other unsecured debt and are structurally subordinated to the liabilities of non-guaranteeing subsidiaries. However, there are no material liabilities at non-guarantors, offering substantial protection from subordination to noteholders. In 2022, issuers and guarantors represented around 91% of FAGE's sales and more than 99% of its total assets.
RATIONALE FOR THE STABLE OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects Moody's expectation that trading conditions and FAGE's credit metrics will remain stable over the next 12-18 months. This stability is supported by lower input costs, which are anticipated to contribute to the company's financial performance. Moody's forecasts that the company's leverage will remain around 1.5x during this period.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Despite the strong credit metrics for the rating, a rating upgrade is unlikely owing to the company's modest size, highly concentrated business, and track record of volatile operating performance, which constrain the rating at the current level. However, positive rating pressure could build if FAGE: (1) improves its scale and diversification, (2) successfully executes its manufacturing expansion plan, (3) keeps a solid liquidity profile supported by sustained strong free cash flow generation, and (4) maintains a track record of solid financial performance with low leverage through the milk price cycle.
Negative rating pressure could arise if there is a sustained deterioration in the company's operating performance, resulting in an increase in Moody's-adjusted gross leverage towards 3.0x. Additionally, if underlying free cash flow turns negative on a sustained basis or the company's liquidity weakens materially, this could further contribute to negative pressure on the ratings.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Consumer Packaged Goods published in June 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/389866. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
COMPANY PROFILE
FAGE is an international, family-owned business, whose main activities are the manufacturing and marketing of Greek yoghurt. The company's sales are concentrated in the US and Europe (mainly Greece, UK and Italy), accounting for 62% and 38% of 2022 total sales, respectively. In 2022, FAGE reported revenues and EBITDA of $552 million and $85 million, respectively.
