Moody's affirms Banreservas' Ba3 deposit rating; upgrades BCA to ba3, and changes outlook to positive
New York, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service, ("Moody's") has today affirmed the deposit ratings assigned to Banco de Reservas de la República Dominicana (Banreservas), including long and short-term local and foreign currency deposit ratings of Ba3 and Not Prime, respectively.  As a government-owned bank, the outlook on the bank's long-term deposit ratings was changed to positive, from stable, following Moody's outlook revision on the Government of Dominican Republic (DR)'s Ba3 government bond rating to positive from stable. For details about the sovereign rating action, please refer to Moody's press release "Moody's changes outlook on Dominican Republic's ratings to positive, affirms Ba3 ratings" https://ratings.moodys.com/ratings-news/406505, dated 10 August 2023.
At the same time, Moody's also upgraded the bank's Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) and Adjusted BCA to ba3 from b1, the long-term local and foreign currency counterparty risk ratings to Ba2 from Ba3, as well as the long-term counterparty risk assessment to Ba2(cr) from Ba3(cr). The short-term counterparty risk ratings of Not Prime, and the short-term counterparty risk assessment of Not Prime(cr) were affirmed.
RATINGS RATIONALE
RATIONALE FOR UPGRADE OF BCA
According to Moody's, the primary driver for the BCA upgrade was the bank's consistent track record of good asset quality, sound funding profile and strong recurring profitability levels that have supported improvement in its capitalization over the past three years. The bank's well-established franchise as the largest bank in the system with 41% deposit market share as of June 2023, also benefits its historically sound liquidity position, and provides a stable access to core deposits, that has helped to shield the bank from the heightened financial markets volatility since 2020.
Despite its strong loan growth of 14% between December 2022 and December 2021, Banreservas' asset risks remained relatively stable, with nonperforming loans ratio reaching a low 0.6% of gross loans in December 2022, and reserve for loan losses covering 5.5% of gross loans and 9.4 times of nonperforming loans. In addition, the bank continues to maintain a relatively large amount of restructured loans that accounted for 1.6% of gross loans in December 2022, related to programs implemented during the pandemic. About 95% of these loans are under due course supporting the quality of this portfolio.  We expect asset quality to remain a positive key driver to the BCA, with the level of nonperforming loans gradually returning to pre-pandemic average of 1.6% (2017 and 2019 period).
Banreservas' BCA of ba3 also incorporates recent enhancement to the bank's capital position, measured by Moody's tangible common equity to risk weighted assets, that increased to 8.9% in December 2022, from 7.8% at the end of 2021, benefiting from steadily high profitability, with net income to tangible assets up to 2.1% in December 2022, from 1.8% in 2021, and diminished dividend payouts since 2021. Strong credit income and low funding costs will offset pressures arising from higher cost of credit as the bank maintains strong loan growth strategy, particularly into higher risk consumer lending products that increased 22% in the last twelve months ended in December 2022 and reached 27% of total loans.
As a bank 100% owned by the government, Moody's assesses Banreservas as government-backed institution, and therefore, the bank's Ba3 deposit ratings as well as its BCA of ba3, are at the same level of the Government of Dominican Republic's Ba3 sovereign bond rating. The government-backed support status is also underpinned by the close financial and business links between the bank and the government, as well as Banreservas' important deposit and lending franchises in the DR. Consequently, the deposit ratings carry the positive outlook of the sovereign rating.
MACRO PROFILE OF DOMINICAN REPUBLIC CHANGED TO MODERATE-
The improvement in the DR's Macro Profile to Moderate-, from Weak+, reflects steady improvement in the country's economic conditions, with sustained high growth rates over the past two decades that have supported the scale and wealth levels of the economy, bolstering the sovereign's resilience to shocks. The country's economic strength also reflects strong real GDP growth of more than 12% in 2021 and the expectation that growth will average around 5% over the medium term, supporting a favorable operating environment for banks. It also incorporates the ongoing development of the tourism sector, which has expanded into higher-end offerings and more international markets, contributing significantly to growth in recent years.
Despite the rapid credit growth in the last decade, the Dominican Republic has one of the lowest financial intermediation rates in Latin America, at around 27% in 2022. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) have remained low as a percentage of gross loans and we expect asset quality to remain at healthy levels supported by tourism, investment and remittances inflows, boosting economic growth and debtholders' repayment capacity. The highly concentrated banking system provides leading banks with strong pricing power, while a stable base of core deposit funding and ample liquidity buffers support the banks' financial flexibility.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
An upgrade of Banreservas' long-term deposit rating is unlikely because they are rated at the same level as the DR's sovereign rating, reflecting the strong credit links between the sovereign and the bank. The bank's BCA is also at the same level of the DR ratings, and therefore has no upward pressure at this point.
Factors that could lead to a BCA downgrade include: (1) a substantial and consistent deterioration in asset risk and profitability and/or (2) weakened capitalization as a result of an acceleration of its loan origination. In addition, a downgrade of the DR's sovereign rating could lower Banreservas' supported ratings, as well as its ba3 BCA. However, these movements would be currently constrained by the positive outlook on the sovereign debt rating.
METHODOLOGY USED
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
