Moody's upgrades Spotsylvania County, VA's issuer and GO ratings to Aaa and assigns Aaa to GO bonds; outlook positive on W&S rev. bonds
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Spotsylvania (County of) VA's issuer and general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) ratings to Aaa from Aa1 and its lease revenue rating to Aa1 from Aa2. Moody's assigned a Aaa rating to the county's General Obligation Public Improvement Bonds, Series 2023, which have a proposed par amount of roughly $58 million. Concurrently, Moody's has affirmed the Aa2 rating on the county's water and sewer revenue bonds. Following the new issuance, the county will have around $462 million of debt outstanding. A stable outlook was assigned to the issuer, GOULT, and lease revenue ratings. A positive outlook was assigned to the water and sewer revenue bonds.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the issuer rating to Aaa reflects the county's ample and improved financial position that is expected to remain stable over the near term, supported by formal fiscal policies and very strong governance (G-1 issuer profile score). The upgrade also considers the strong and diversifying local economy, characterized by high resident incomes and above average property wealth. Overall leverage is moderate when including large retirement and healthcare liabilities in the county's component unit school board, while borrowing and capital plans are manageable.
The Aaa rating on the county's GOULT bonds is at the same level as the issuer rating, reflecting the county's irrevocable full faith and credit pledge and an unlimited ad valorem tax.
The Aa1 rating on the county's lease revenue bonds is one notch below the issuer rating and reflects the risk of non-appropriation and the more essential nature of the financed assets (county offices and school buildings). The rating also considers the county's pledge to appropriate an amount sufficient to pay principal and interest on the bonds under financing agreements.
The Aa2 rating on the county's water and sewer revenue bonds reflects the enterprise's strong financial performance that is characterized by solid debt service coverage, very strong liquidity, and prudent rate management. The rating also incorporates the stable and diverse customer base, ample system capacity, and moderate system size, balanced by above average and growing leverage.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook on the issuer, GOULT, and lease revenue ratings reflects the likelihood that the county's economy will continue to expand and the financial position will remain strong, given a growing revenue base, formal fiscal policies, and strong governance.
The positive outlook on the water and sewer revenue bonds reflects the upgrade to the county's issuer rating and the water and sewer enterprise's contribution to a strong financial position. The outlook incorporates our expectation that the enterprise's liquidity will remain ample relative to operations and leverage will remain manageable relative to revenue, supported by the county's strong rate setting record.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Not applicable (issuer, GOULT, lease revenue)
- Sustained strength in debt service coverage and liquidity (water and sewer revenue)
- Successful managing of debt and equity funded capital plans (water and sewer revenue)
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Significant declines in reserves and liquidity (issuer, GOULT, lease revenue)
- Deterioration of the local economy and resident income and wealth (issuer, GOULT, lease revenue)
- Large increases in leverage without accompanied revenue growth (issuer, GOULT, lease revenue)
- Material declines in debt service coverage or liquidity (water and sewer revenue)
- Large increases in leverage without accompanied growth in revenue (water and sewer revenue)
LEGAL SECURITY
The GOULT bonds are backed by an irrevocable pledge of the county's full faith and credit, payable by an annual ad valorem tax that is without limitation as to rate or amount.
The lease revenue bonds are backed by the county's pledge to annually appropriate for debt service under financing agreements between the county and the economic development authority. The bonds are also backed by leasehold interests in the financed projects (county offices and school buildings).
The water and sewer revenue bonds are secured by net revenues of the enterprise.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds from the issuance of the bonds will be used to finance various capital projects including public safety, education, and transportation projects.
PROFILE
Spotsylvania County, VA encompasses 414 square miles in central Virginia (Commonwealth of Virginia, Aaa stable), approximately 55 miles north of the state capital (Richmond, VA, Aa1 stable). The county is governed by a Board of Supervisors, comprised of seven members elected to four-year terms who hire a county administrator to manage day-to-day operations. The county's population totaled 138,493 as of the 2021 American Community Survey.
The water and sewer utility is a department of Spotsylvania County and provides treatment and conveyance services to over 33,000 customers within the county and neighboring City of Fredericksburg (Aa2).
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the issuer, general obligation, and lease ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. The principal methodology used in the revenue ratings was US Municipal Utility Revenue Debt Methodology published in April 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386721. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
