Moody's assigns Baa1 to Chambers CO. Improvement District 2, TX's GOULT bonds; outlook positive
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned a Baa1 rating to Chambers County Improvement District 2, TX's $5 million Unlimited Tax Bonds, Series 2023. Moody's maintains the Baa1 rating on the district's outstanding general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) debt. Post issuance, the district's GOULT debt will total approximately $57.2 million. The outlook is positive.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Baa1 rating reflects the district's growing but significantly concentrated tax base located near the Houston metropolitan area (Aa3 stable) with large personal property relating to the energy sector, which can be volatile. The rating also reflects the district's strong reserves that are expected to continue and a debt burden that is elevated with expected plans for additional debt next year. Positively, the district benefits from the absence of liabilities related to pension or other post-employment benefits. Lastly, the rating considers the district's exposure to environmental considerations given its proximity to the Gulf Coast.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects expected tax base growth supported by ongoing development, which if realized will position the district for upward pressure despite the concentration. Additional tax base growth will also drive increased revenues and support financial operations while keeping the high debt load manageable.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
- Material diversification/expansion of the tax base
- Material decline in the debt burden
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
- Significant decline in the tax base
- Trend of operating deficits leading to an erosion of reserves
- Increase in the debt burden without corresponding increase in taxable values
LEGAL SECURITY
The Series 2023 bonds are payable from the proceeds of a continuing, direct annual ad valorem tax, without legal limitation as to rate or amount, levied against all taxable property located  within the district.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds from the Series 2023 bonds will be used to reimburse the developer for expenditures related to certain road improvements.
PROFILE
Chambers County Improvement District 2 consists of approximately 895 acres of land and is located 20 miles east of downtown Houston (Aa3 stable) and eight miles east of Baytown (Aa2 stable). The district is within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of Baytown and lies within Goose Creek Consolidated Independent School District (Aa2 stable). The district provides water and wastewater service to a variety of large industrial manufacturing and distribution-related entities within its service area. Of note, about 310 acres of the district are located in the FEMA designated 100-year flood plain. All properties developed within the 100-year flood plain were elevated above flood plain designations. The district consists entirely of commercial property and does not report any residents within its boundaries.
METHODOLOGY
      The principal methodology used in this rating was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
