Moody's upgrades Erste Bank Hungary's long-term deposit ratings to A3 from Baa1, maintains stable outlook
Limassol, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has today upgraded the long-term deposit ratings of Erste Bank Hungary Zrt. (EBH) to A3 from Baa1 and affirmed the bank's ba1 Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA), baa3 Adjusted BCA. The bank's P-2 short-term deposit ratings, A3/P-2 long and short-term Counterparty Risk Ratings (CRRs) and Baa1(cr)/P-2(cr) Counterparty Risk Assessments (CR Assessments) were also affirmed. The outlook on the long-term deposit ratings remains stable.
Today's rating action is driven by the agency's assessment of a reduced loss at failure for EBH's junior depositors, according to Moody's Advanced Loss Given Failure (LGF) analysis, following the additional amount of subordinated debt that EBH has issued to its parent bank Austria's Erste Group Bank AG (long-term deposit ratings: A1, Stable, BCA: baa1) and debt issued externally to the market in order to satisfy its Minimum own funds and eligible liabilities requirement (MREL).
RATINGS RATIONALE
UPGRADE OF THE LONG-TERM DEPOSIT RATINGS
The upgrade of EBH's long-term deposit ratings to A3 from Baa1 is driven by the affirmation of the bank's BCA at ba1; Moody's unchanged assumption of high parental support from Erste Group Bank AG resulting in a baa3 Adjusted BCA; and three notches of uplift, up from previously two, following the application of Moody's Advanced LGF analysis. The agency's unchanged assumption of low likelihood of support from the Government of Hungary (Baa2 stable) in case of need does not result in an additional uplift to the bank's deposit ratings.
Since 2022 EBH has issued around HUF190 billion (EUR500 million) of senior unsecured debt both in the domestic and international debt markets and has also increased its MREL eligible Tier 2 capital received from its parent bank to around HUF140 billion. This has enabled the bank to meet its binding MREL requirement of 24.86% effective as of 1 January 2024. Given the changes that the debt issuance has had on EBH's liability structure, Moody's revised Advanced LGF analysis now indicates an extremely low loss-given-failure for junior depositors, leading the agency to position the ratings three notches above the bank's baa3 Adjusted BCA from previously two.
There is no further upside to EBH's A3 long-term deposit ratings which at two notches above the rating of the Government of Hungary are at the maximum level allowed under the agency's Banks Methodology.
AFFIRMATION OF THE BASELINE CREDIT ASSESSMENT
In affirming EBH's ba1 BCA, Moody's has considered the anticipated evolution of key financial metrics over the next 12 to 18 months, including a moderate deterioration in asset quality in light of the still high inflation and interest rates. The bank reported nonperforming loans to gross loans of 3.6% while the coverage was a strong 94% as of December 2022.
The bank's ba1 BCA also reflects its moderate capitalization with a Tangible Common Equity to adjusted risk weighted assets of 13.8% as of December 2022. In assessing the bank's capitalization, the agency also incorporates the risks stemming from EBH's large investments in bonds as a result of its structural liquidity excess. With a loan-to-deposit ratio of 57.5%, EBH has a large buffer of liquid assets, accounting for 41.2% of tangible assets as of December 2022. The bulk of these – around 30% of total assets – are investments in bonds, predominantly accounted for at amortised cost. Given the sharp rise in market interest rates in 2022, the market value of EBH's bond portfolio, was significantly below its accounting value at the end of December 2022. While the valuation gap is more material than that of its European peers, most of which have accounted for a larger share of these losses in their regulatory capital ratios, Moody's considers that such losses are very unlikely to be crystallized for liquidity purposes. EBH's deposit franchise is strong, with 45% of total customer deposits consisting of more stable retail clients, and Moody's views EBH's liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) of 145% as comfortable, noting that the bank can use its large portfolio of securities as collateral to access further liquidity without crystallizing unrealized losses.
The affirmation of EBH's ba1 BCA also incorporates the bank's strong earnings generation capacity despite low business growth due to the weakened environment and several government measures that continue to pressure the bank's profitability.
OUTLOOK
The stable outlook on the bank's long-term deposit ratings is driven by the agency's view that the bank's standalone risk profile will remain at current levels. The outlook is also aligned with the stable outlook on the Government of Hungary.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The bank's A3 long-term deposit ratings are two notches above the ratings of the Government of Hungary, the highest level allowed under Moody's Banks Methodology, and can only be upgraded following the combination of an upgrade of EBH's Adjusted BCA and an upgrade of the sovereign rating.
EBH's BCA could be upgraded following an improvement in its financial profile, mainly its funding and liquidity, while sustaining its current solvency profile and improving its profitability. The bank's Adjusted BCA could be upgraded following an improvement in its BCA or an upgrade of the BCA of its parent bank.
EBH's deposit ratings could be downgraded following lower volumes of more subordinated debt instruments resulting in lower uplift following the application or Moody's Advanced LGF analysis. The deposit ratings could also be downgraded following a significantly reduced likelihood of parental support or a substantial weakening of its parent's capacity to provide support.
Finally a downgrade of the rating of the Government of Hungary would result in a downgrade of EBH's deposit ratings.
EBH's BCA could be downgraded in case of a significant worsening of its asset quality, a reduction in capitalisation or a sharp worsening in its liquidity and funding position. The bank's Adjusted BCA would not be affected by a one-notch lower BCA.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
