Moody's upgrades Hopkins County, TX's issuer and GOLT ratings to Aa3
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Hopkins County, TX's issuer and general obligation limited tax (GOLT) ratings to Aa3 from A1. The stable outlook has been removed. The county has $12.7 million in debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the issuer rating to Aa3 reflects the steady economic and tax base growth over the past several years, as well as the strong financial position demonstrated by a steady improvement in reserves which will remain stable based on projections for the next two years. The rating also incorporates long-term liabilities and fixed costs ratios that will remain manageable given no near-term debt plans, and resident income that is lower than its peers
The Aa3 rating assigned to the county's general obligation bonds is equivalent to the Aa3 issuer rating given reflecting the city's ample available taxing headroom to generate dedicated property taxes sufficient to pay debt service, if required.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook was removed because Moody's does not generally assign outlooks to local governments with this amount of debt.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Strengthened economic metrics
-     Material increase in reserves
-     Reduced leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Weakening financial performance that reduces reserves
-     Weakened economic metrics
-     Significant increase in leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are direct obligations of the county, payable from a continuing annual ad valorem tax levied on all taxable property within the county, within the limits prescribed by law.
PROFILE
Hopkins County is located in northeastern Texas. The county seat is Sulphur Springs (Aa3), which is approximately 75 miles northeast of Dallas (A1 stable). The largest industry sectors that drive the local economy are farm employment, retail trade, and local government. The county's population is just under 36,500.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
