Moody's affirms Stafford Township SD, NJ's outstanding Aa3 issuer and GOULT ratings; outlook positive
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed Stafford Township School District, NJ's outstanding issuer and general obligation ratings at Aa3. A positive outlook has been assigned.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Aa3 issuer reflects the district's healthy local economy with a recent uptick in enrollment. Its reserve position has been on a positive trend over the past several years and has reached strong levels, however, the district is set to see a material decline in state aid for fiscal 2024. Overall leverage is low but there are future capital plans in the planning stages.
The Aa3 general obligation rating is at the same level at the issuer rating reflecting the unlimited ad valorem tax pledge supporting its outstanding bonds.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the expectation that the district's recently improved reserves can be maintained in the near-term with its expected declines in state aid.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Maintenance of reserves as state aid is expected to decline
- Improvement in resident income and wealth
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Inability to maintain balanced operations and decline in reserves
- Increase in leverage
- Contraction of the local economy
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's outstanding bonds are general obligations of the district and benefit from its unlimited ad valorem tax pledge.
PROFILE
Stafford Township School District, NJ is located in southern New Jersey (A1 stable). It provides pre-K-6 education to approximately 2,300 students from the township of Stafford (Aa3).
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
