Moody's upgrades Ingersoll Rand to investment grade; assigns Baa3 senior unsecured rating; outlook positive
New York, August 07, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) assigned a Baa3 senior unsecured rating to Ingersoll Rand Inc. (Ingersoll Rand), including the company's proposed senior unsecured notes offering. The senior secured bank debt ratings at the company's subsidiary, Gardner Denver, Inc., were upgraded to Baa2 from Ba1.  Concurrently, the Ba1 corporate family rating (CFR), Ba1-PD probability of default rating (PDR), and SGL-1 speculative grade liquidity rating have been withdrawn. The rating outlook for Gardner Denver, Inc. and Ingersoll-Rand Services Company remains positive and the rating outlook assigned for Ingersoll Rand Inc. is positive.
"We expect that Ingersoll Rand will sustain at least mid-single digit organic revenue growth supplemented by acquisitions," said Gigi Adamo, Moody's Vice President-Senior Analyst. "The upgrades reflect our expectation that Ingersoll Rand will maintain conservative financial policies that include well-balanced capital allocation with debt/EBITDA below 3.0x as unsecured debt becomes an increasingly important part of its capital structure."
The rating upgrades reflect Ingersoll Rand's well-established market presence in diverse end markets and a broad geographic footprint. These characteristics enable the company to withstand market downcycles.  Further, the company has demonstrated the ability to sustain EBITDA margins well exceeding 20% and strong cash generation amid macroeconomic supply chain and inflationary challenges. The upgrades also reflect Moody's view that Ingersoll Rand's capital structure will evolve such that unsecured debt will comprise the majority of its debt structure. Governance considerations, specifically the company's desired capital structure and target leverage, were key drivers of the rating action.
The two notch upgrade of the senior secured bank debt to Baa2 from Ba1 is based on Moody's view that the proposed senior unsecured notes will be structurally subordinated to the existing senior secured bank debt. The structural subordination arises from the issuance of the proposed senior unsecured notes at Ingersoll Rand Inc., a holding company and parent company without related guarantees from operating subsidiaries. Conversely, the issuer of the existing senior secured bank debt, Gardner Denver, Inc., is an operating company of Ingersoll Rand. The resulting seniority claim that the senior secured bank debt possesses relative to the senior unsecured notes due to the structural subordination is reflected in the one notch rating differential between the bank debt and proposed notes.
The positive outlook reflects Moody's expectation that Ingersoll Rand will over time take steps to increase the proportion of unsecured debt in its capital structure while maintaining a healthy EBITDA margin and generating free cash flow well in excess of $800 million annually. This will allow the company to maintain debt-to-EBITDA below 3.0x, absent sizable acquisitions.  The outlook also reflects Moody's expectation that the company will continue to take proactive actions to mitigate macroeconomic related supply chain challenges and inflationary cost pressures.
Upgrades:
..Issuer: Gardner Denver, Inc.
....Backed Senior Secured 1st Lien Bank Credit Facility, Upgraded to Baa2 from Ba1
..Issuer: Ingersoll-Rand Services Company
....Backed Senior Secured 1st Lien Bank Credit Facility, Upgraded to Baa2 from Ba1
Assignments:
..Issuer: Ingersoll Rand Inc.
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Assigned Baa3
Withdrawals:
..Issuer: Gardner Denver, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1-PD
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated SGL-1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Gardner Denver, Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Positive
..Issuer: Ingersoll Rand Inc.
....Outlook, Assigned Positive
..Issuer: Ingersoll-Rand Services Company
....Outlook, Remains Positive
RATINGS RATIONALE
Ingersoll Rand's Baa3 senior unsecured rating reflects the company's well-established market position and brand strength in mission critical engineered products globally. The company sells to diverse markets within both its Industrial Technologies and Services as well as Precision and Science Technologies business segments. Further, the company benefits from a recurring service and aftermarket business that comprises over one third of revenue. Moody's expects that the company will sustain strong liquidity, supported by strong cash flow attributable to its solid operating margin and modest capital expenditures. We expect continued healthy revenue growth and profitability over the next few years, which will maintain strong free cash generation.
Moody's expects the company to maintain a well-balanced financial policy balancing creditor and shareholder interests while maintaining its publicly stated net debt/EBITDA financial leverage at less than 2.0x, absent meaningfully sized acquisitions. Moody's expects that acquisitions will continue to add to the company's scale and product offering in high-margin end markets.  We also believe the company will be successful in capturing synergies from such acquisitions.
At the same time, Ingersoll Rand is not immune to macroeconomic related supply chain and inflationary cost pressures that although easing, are expected to persist through the second half of 2023.  However, Moody's expects resilient demand for the company's products and strong margins stemming from pricing actions and benefits from operating efficiencies and cost synergies. Given the company's pace of acquisition activity, execution and integration risk are also credit considerations.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Factors that could cause upward ratings pressure include continued progress in migrating the company's debt structure to predominantly unsecured debt while adhering to conservative financial policies. Successful execution of top-line growth and acquisition synergies from bolt on acquisitions while maintaining strong operating performance could also cause upward rating pressure. The realization of cost saving initiatives that translate to higher prospective EBITDA margins would also be considered. Debt/EBITDA maintained below 3.0x while adhering to publicly communicated financial policies could also support an upgrade.
Conversely, factors that could pressure ratings downward include reverting to a majority weighted secured debt structure and more aggressive financial policies. A deterioration in operating performance, acquisition integration or weakening cash generation could also pressure ratings downward. Negative credit implications could also result from an inability or unwillingness to maintain leverage below 3.5x.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Manufacturing published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74970. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Headquartered in Davidson, North Carolina, Ingersoll Rand Inc., the parent company of Gardner Denver, Inc., is a publicly-traded global manufacturer of compressors, pumps, vacuum and blowers used in general industrial and other markets. Revenues for the last twelve months ended June 30, 2023 totaled approximately $6.5 billion.
