Moody's upgrades Belle Vernon Area School District, PA's issuer, GOULT, and GOLT ratings to A3; positive outlook
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service upgrades Belle Vernon Area School District, PA's issuer, general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT), and general obligation limited tax (GOLT) ratings to A3 from Baa1, affecting approximately $37.5 million in rated debt outstanding. The outlook was changed to positive from stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A3 issuer rating reflects the district's sound financial position, moderately sized tax base, average resident income and wealth, relatively stable enrollment trend, moderate long-term liabilities, and modest fixed costs.
The A3 rating on the district's GOULT debt is equivalent to its issuer rating based on its general obligation full faith and credit pledge as well as the ability to levy property taxes necessary to pay debt service, without limitation.
The lack of distinction between the district's issuer rating and the A3 rating on the district's GOLT debt is based on the GOLT's general obligation full faith and credit pledge. The GOLT rating also reflects Pennsylvania school districts' ability to apply for exceptions to the cap on property tax increases in order to cover debt service and the Commonwealth's history of granting such exceptions.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the expectation that the district's financial position will improve in the near term.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Material growth in reserves and liquidity
-     Strengthening of resident income and wealth
-     Improved enrollment trend
-     Significant decrease in total leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Material decline in financial position
-     Deterioration of socioeconomic indicators or enrollment
-     Significant increase in long-term liabilities
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's GOULT debt is secured by its unlimited tax pledge, as the bonds were issued to refund debt that was originally incurred prior to the 2006 implementation of Act 1.
The district's GOLT debt is secured by its limited tax pledge, which is subject to the limits of Pennsylvania's Act 1 "Taxpayer Relief Act."
PROFILE
Belle Vernon Area School District is located 25 miles southeast of Pittsburgh (A1 stable) and serves approximately 2,400 students in Washington Township, Fayette City, North Belle Vernon (Baa1 stable), Belle Vernon, and Rostraver Township. The district provides kindergarten through twelfth grade education, with facilities including two elementary schools, one middle school, and one high school.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
