Moody's revises NYPA's outlook to positive from stable; upgrades affiliate SFP Transmission, NY to A1 from A2 and changes outlook to positive from stable
Approximately $2.4 billion of debt securities affected
New York, August 17, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service today affirmed the Aa2 and P-1 ratings to New York State Power Authority (NYPA) and changed NYPA's outlook to positive from stable. Concurrent with this rating action, Moody's upgraded its affiliate SFP Transmission, NY's (SFP) revenue bonds to A1 from A2, and changed SFP's outlook to positive from stable.  
RATINGS RATIONALE
Today's rating action at NYPA considers the Authority's recent strong financial and operating performance, the increased revenue diversification relating to the growth of transmission investments within the NYPA family, the completion and near completion of SFP's first two transmission projects and an improved credit profile of the State of New York (Aa1 stable).   NYPA serves as an instrumentality of the state and plays a key part in its economic development goals.  
The upgrade of SFP to A1 considers the success achieved year-to-date in achieving commercial operation of two transmission project investments within the timeline and budgetary parameters previously outlined leading to improved cash flow visibility.  The Smart Path Reliability Transmission Project (Smart Path) entered into service in May 2023 and SFP anticipates full operation of its ownership in Central East Energy Connect Project (CEEC) by year-end.   SFP was formed by NYPA to finance, operate, and maintain transmission projects that are eligible to collect transmission revenue through the New York Independent System Operator (NYISO). SFP has been structured to be a separate credit from NYPA 's general credit with the repayment of its debt obligations derived solely from revenue earned by the specific transmission projects' assets.
Following today's upgrade at SFP, the reduced notching between the ratings at NYPA and SFP acknowledges the successful execution of construction for SFP's two inaugural projects and the increasing amount of revenue and cash flow visibility that will emerge and be sustained over time as transmission assets are  completed.
Fiscal year 2022 was a strong year for NYPA due to higher market energy prices and transmission revenues.  Operating revenues and operating income (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) totaling $4,007 million and $638 million in 2022 compare favorably to $2,741 million and $420 million, respectively, in 2021.   While SFP's contribution to NYPA's operating income in 2022 was only $31 million, its contribution will increase in 2023 and beyond due to full year revenue contributions from Smart Path and CEEC and the anticipated addition of incremental transmission investments.  
Moody's calculates NYPA's consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio (FCCR) in 2022 at more than 3.0x compared to approximately 2.0x the prior year and its adjusted debt ratio at approximately 40% from 50% previously.  A material contributor to NYPA's improved financial metrics was a decision in 2022 that an existing power purchase agreement (PPA) with a third-party no longer met the definition of a lease under accounting rule GASB No. 87.  As a result, the PPA, which previously had been recorded as a lease asset  and liability (approximately $984 million capitalized lease obligation in 2021) is no longer  reflected as an asset and liability on NYPA's financials as of December 31, 2022.  
Importantly, the change in lease accounting did not change the purpose or economic value of the PPA.   Power is indirectly provided to NYPA's New York City Governmental customers under the PPA who reimburse NYPA for all related-costs associated with the PPA.  There is no economic benefit to NYPA associated with the PPA.
RATING OUTLOOK
NYPA's positive outlook reflects an expectation for continued strong operating and financial performance over the next 12-18 months and further cash flow diversification associated with the commercialization and increased transmission investments at SFP.  
The positive outlook for SFP reflects an expected improvement in financial performance as it expands its transmission-related investments over the near-term.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- NYPA's rating could be upgraded should it maintain a consolidated FCCR at or greater than 3.0x, unrestricted cash in excess of $1.0 billion and increasing revenue contributions from SFP.  Greater clarity around the contribution of future transmission projects which, together with the existing projects, support SFP's standalone FCCR at or greater than 1.6x could support an upgrade. An upgrade of NYPA would likely trigger an upgrade of SFP.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- In light of today's action, a downgrade of NYPA's rating is unlikely over the near-term.  Failure to meet measures cited above or a decline in the credit profile of the State of New York or a material downstate customers could lead to a revision of NYPA's outlook to stable. Moreover, a downgrade of SFP is unlikely over the near-term.  Failure to finance additional transmission investments in a manner that supports SFP's credit profile or material delays or cost overruns could lead to a revision of SFP's outlook to stable.
LEGAL SECURITY
NYPA's revenue bonds are payable and secured by a pledge of the Trust Estate including all revenues derived from the operation of any of NYPA's facilities. SFP's revenue bonds are payable solely from the net revenue of the designated transmission projects and supported by dedicated SFP liquidity and operating reserves. They are legally separate from NYPA with no access to NYPA's liquidity and a SFP default would not cross-default to NYPA's revenue bonds. In the event that NYPA were to default, SFP bondholders would not have acceleration rights. Instead, NYPA has covenanted to make all of the SFP books and accounts available to the Trustee for the benefit of the SFP bondholders, and to pay the Trustee all of the SFP revenues, keeping the two pledges separate.
PROFILE
NYPA was created in 1931 and is a provider of wholesale power and transmission service provider. NYPA's primary customers are municipal and investor-owned utilities, rural electric cooperatives, large industrial customers located throughout New York State and various public corporations located primarily in the metropolitan  of New York City.  To provide electric service, NYPA owns and operates five major generating facilities, eleven small gas-fired generating facilities, four small hydroelectric facilities and more than 1,400 circuit miles of transmission lines.  
SFP Transmission was established by NYPA to finance, operate, and maintain transmission projects that are eligible to collect transmission revenue through the NYISO.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the NYPA long-term ratings was US Public Power Electric Utilities with Generation Ownership Exposure published in January 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/398041. The principal methodology used in the NYPA short-term ratings was US Municipal Short-term Debt Methodology published in May 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/398329. The principal methodology used in SFG long-term rating was Regulated Electric and Gas Networks published in April 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386754. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
