Moody's revises Varex's outlook to positive; affirms B2 CFR
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) affirmed the ratings of Varex Imaging Corporation ("Varex"), including the B2 Corporate Family Rating (CFR), B2-PD Probability of Default Rating (PDR) and B1 rating on the company's senior secured bonds. At the same time, Moody's upgraded the company's Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating (SGL) to SGL-1 (very good) from SGL-2 (good) and revised its outlook to positive from stable.
The change in outlook reflects Moody's view of continued revenue growth, modest leverage and very good liquidity. Varex will maintain its market position in the niche medical imaging component business, supported by industry tailwinds that will drive top and bottom-line growth. Moody's expects the company's debt-to-EBITDA ratio to remain below 4.0x times over the next 12 to 18 months. The upgrade of the Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating to SGL-1 reflects Moody's expectation that the company will maintain a very good liquidity profile over the forecast period, including sustained positive free cash flow.
Governance risk is a factor in the rating action. The company has a track record of prudent financial policies demonstrated by moderate financial leverage and good liquidity. The company has also remediated internal control issues which resulted in a delayed 10-K filing for the fiscal year 2019.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Varex Imaging Corporation
....Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed B2
....Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed B2-PD
....Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed B1
Upgrades:
..Issuer: Varex Imaging Corporation
....Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Upgraded to SGL-1 from SGL-2
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Varex Imaging Corporation
....Outlook, Changed to Positive from Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The B2 CFR reflects Varex's modest scale and long-term pressures on hospital's budgets which limits the growth of new equipment spend. In addition, Varex faces pressures on profitability from supply chain headwinds and labor costs which are moderating. The rating is further constrained by the moderately high concentration among Varex's main customers, with its top customer, a large original equipment manufacturer ("OEM") representing ~17% of revenues.
The B2 rating is supported by the company's long and sticky relationships with key customers to supply critical components of their imaging equipment and Moody's expectation that revenue growth will continue on its solid post-COVID trajectory. Moody's forecasts that Varex will generate mid single-digit top-line and earnings growth over the next 12-18 months which will result in continued deleveraging and cash generation. Moody's expects that adjusted debt / EBITDA will remain below 4.0x during the forecast period. The rating also reflects Moody's expectations of relatively conservative financial policies going forward.
Moody's expects Varex to maintain very good liquidity over the next 12 to 18 months.  As of June 30, 2023, the company had $118.5 million of cash on hand. When also including marketable securities not in cash and cash equivalents, the total was $152.5 million. The company also had access to a $100 million undrawn ABL facility. This facility has a 1.0x fixed charge covenant that would only be tested when excess availability is less than the greater of 10% of the Line Cap and $7.5 million. Moody's expects the company will generate at least $60 million in free cash flow in fiscal year 2024.
The rating of the secured notes is B1, one notch above the Corporate Family Rating, due to their senior ranking in the capital structure. The company's notes are secured by substantially all of the company's assets, except for the assets for which a first priority security interest is pledged for the ABL facility, in which the notes have a second lien security interest. The B1 is supported by the first loss absorption provided by $200 million of 4% unsecured convertible notes due 2025.
The positive outlook reflects Moody's expectation that Varex will continue to have steady revenue and earnings growth, with leverage staying below 4.0x over the next 12 to 18 months.
ESG CONSIDERATIONS
Varex's CIS-3 (previously CIS-4) score indicates that ESG considerations have a limited impact on the current credit rating with potential for greater negative impact over time. Varex has exposure to governance risks (G-3, previously G-4) with moderate leverage and internal control issues in prior years which have led to a delayed 10-K filing. Governance risk is mitigated by a remediation effort completed in 2021, and all filings have been made on time over the past three years.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Ratings could be upgraded if the company shows increase in size, earnings and margins. Additionally, diversification of customers and shift to a more recurring revenue model could put upside pressure on the ratings. Quantitatively, debt/EBITDA sustained below 4 times would also support an upgrade.
Ratings could be downgraded if the company's operating performance deteriorates, free cash flow turns negative or if liquidity weakens. A more aggressive stance towards acquisitions or shareholder returns could lead to a downgrade. Quantitatively, the ratings could be downgraded if Varex's debt/EBITDA is sustained above 5 times.
Headquartered in Salt Lake City, Utah, Varex Imaging Corporation ("Varex) is a manufacturer of a broad range of medical products, which include X-ray imaging components (X-ray tubes, digital detectors, image processing software and workstations) for use in a range of applications, including radiographic or fluoroscopic imaging, mammography, computed tomography, and oncology. The company also manufactures imaging components for industrial end-users such as airport security, cargo screening and nondestructive examination. Varex generated revenue of $897 million in the trailing twelve months to June 30, 2023.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Medical Products and Devices published in October 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/75796. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
