Moody's upgrades Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, IL's GOULT & GOLT to Aa1
New York, August 23, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago, IL's general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) and general obligation limited tax (GOLT) debt service extension base (DSEB) ratings to Aa1 from Aa2. The outlook is stable. At the close of fiscal 2022, the district had $2.6 billion of debt outstanding including general obligation debt and state revolving fund loans.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the GOULT rating to Aa1 reflects the district's sound pension contributions that were significantly increased in recent years while maintaining strong financial operations and reserves. The district benefits from an extremely large tax base and diverse economy that includes the City of Chicago (Baa3 stable) and 128 suburban communities. Also incorporated in the rating are the district's elevated debt and unfunded pension burdens with significant overlapping leverage.
The Aa1 rating on the GOLT DSEB debt is the same as the GOULT rating given the nature of the pledge, which is a first budget obligation payable from all available funds. The bonds also benefit from a dedicated property tax levy unlimited as to rate but limited as to the amount of the district's DSEB.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects the expectation that the district will continue to maintain solid pension contributions and strong reserves given a stable revenue base. It also incorporates our expectation the debt burden will not materially increase based on the pace of planned debt issuance relative to amortization and revenue growth.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Moderation of direct and overlapping leverage while maintaining strong capital investments
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Declines in operating reserves or liquidity
- Material growth in long-term leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's GOULT debt is supported by a dedicated property tax levy, unlimited as to rate or amount.
The district's GOLT DSEB debt is secured by a dedicated property tax levy unlimited as to rate but limited as to the amount of the district's DSEB.
PROFILE
The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago is the sanitary District for nearly all of Cook County. The district is governed by an independently elected board. It provides collection and treatment services for approximately 5.2 million people over 882 square miles, including residents of the City of Chicago and 128 suburban communities.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
