Moody's affirms Chefs' Warehouse' B2 CFR; downgrades SGL to SGL-2; positive outlook
New York, August 29, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) affirmed The Chefs' Warehouse, Inc.'s (Chefs) B2 corporate family rating (CFR) and B2-PD probability of default rating (PDR). At the same time, Moody's downgraded the company's speculative grade liquidity rating to SGL-2 from SGL-1. Moody's also affirmed Chefs' Warehouse Parent, LLC's B2 senior secured bank credit facility rating. The outlook remains positive.
The rating affirmations with a positive outlook reflect Moody's view that despite weakening consumer spending and food price disinflation, Chefs will be able to improve its credit metrics supported with EBITDA growth to levels appropriate for a B1 rating, as it benefits from market share gains, higher labor productivity, and contributions from recently closed acquisitions.
The downgrade of the SGL to SGL-2 (good) from SGL-1 (very good) reflects the company's lower balance sheet cash and increased revolver borrowings following the recent acquisitions. Over the next 12-18 months, Moody's expects modest positive free cash flow, good revolver availability under the $300 million asset-based revolver and a springing covenant-only capital structure.
Moody's took the following rating actions:
..Issuer: The Chefs' Warehouse, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed B2
.... Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed B2-PD
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Downgraded to SGL-2 from SGL-1
.... Outlook, Remains Positive
..Issuer: Chefs' Warehouse Parent, LLC
.... Senior Secured Bank Credit Facility, Affirmed B2
.... Outlook, Remains Positive
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Chefs' Warehouse, Inc.'s B2 CFR reflects the company's position as a premier distributor of specialty food products in the US and Canada. Chefs has a product portfolio with a deep selection of specialty and center-of-the-plate food products that differentiates its offering from the larger, traditional broadline foodservice distributors. The company's focus on the independent restaurant segment and scale within the segment has allowed it to maintain solid operating margins relative to peers. The rating also incorporates governance considerations, specifically the company's solid execution and financial policies that balance the maintenance of a 3-4x typical net leverage range with acquisitions and investment in the business.
At the same time, the rating reflects the high degree of competition in the food distribution sector and Chefs' modest scale relative to larger more diversified peers. Chefs' leverage is relatively high at 5x Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA (equivalent to 3.7x net leverage as defined by the company). The industry is likely to face pressure from modest declines in independent restaurant volumes given weakening discretionary spending, as well as high volatility in food costs, including deflation in certain categories. However, Moody's expects these headwinds to be mitigated by Chefs' continued market share gains, a premium customer base that is more resilient than the overall independent sector in economic downturns, increased labor productivity and earnings contribution from recently closed acquisitions. As a result, Moody's projects debt/EBITDA to trend to 4.5x and EBITA/interest expense to be around 2.7x over the next 12-18 months. In addition, while its overall financial policies are balanced, Chefs' largely debt-funded acquisitive growth strategy increases event and execution risk.
The positive outlook reflects Moody's expectation for revenue and earnings growth that could lead to sustained deleveraging below 4.5 times Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA. The outlook could revert back to stable if earnings do not increase as anticipated, or if the company undertakes acquisitions that carry substantial execution risk and/or could result in a prolonged period of elevated leverage.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The rating could be upgraded if the company sustained revenue and earnings grow such that debt/EBITDA is sustained below 4.5 times and EBITA/interest expense above 2.25 times. An upgrade would also require at least good liquidity and balanced financial strategies.
The ratings could be downgraded if liquidity deteriorates for any reason, expectations for Moody's-adjusted debt/EBITDA to be sustained above 5.5 times or EBITA/interest expense falls below 1.5 times.
Headquartered in Ridgefield, Connecticut, The Chefs' Warehouse, Inc. distributes specialty food products to menu-driven independent restaurants, fine dining establishments, country clubs, hotels, caterers, culinary schools, bakeries, patisseries, chocolatiers, cruise lines, casinos, and specialty food stores in the United States, Canada and the Middle East. The company generated net sales of $3 billion for the twelve months ended June 30, 2023.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Distribution and Supply Chain Services published in February 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/398921. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
