Moody's affirms Municipal Bank's long-term deposit ratings at B1, changes outlook to positive from stable
Limassol, August 08, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has today affirmed Municipal Bank AD's (Municipal) long and short-term deposit ratings at B1/NP and changed the outlook on the long-term deposit ratings to positive from stable. At the same time the rating agency affirmed Municipal's b3 Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) and Adjusted BCA, its Ba3/NP long and short-term Counterparty Risk Ratings (CRRs) and its Ba3(cr)/NP(cr) long- and short-term Counterparty Risk (CR) Assessments.
RATINGS RATIONALE
-- RATINGS AFFIRMATION
Municipal's ratings balance its adequate capital metrics, deposit-based funding structure and high liquidity, against challenges in carving out a defendable franchise in Bulgaria's competitive market and its concentrated ownership structure, along with still elevated assets risks.
The affirmation of the B1 long-term deposit ratings also reflects Moody's Advanced Loss Given Failure (LGF) analysis that considers the risks faced by the different debt and deposit classes across the liability structure should the bank enter resolution. The Advanced LGF analysis indicates that Municipal's deposits are likely to face a very low loss-given-failure, driven by the significant amount of junior deposits that would be available to share losses, leading to two notches of rating uplift from the bank's b3 Adjusted BCA.
As of end-June 2023, Municipal was the fourteenth-largest bank by assets in Bulgaria with a market share of 1.4%. While Municipal's profitability has improved over the past year, Moody's expects the bank will continue to face challenges in attaining significant scale and carving out a defendable universal banking franchise, given fierce competition from larger banks in Bulgaria that are subsidiaries of European banking groups. Municipal's digital product offering also remains limited compared to domestic peers, restricting its ability to attract new customers.
Furthermore, the bank's current concentrated private ownership structure, with the main shareholder holding 95.5% of the bank's capital as of end-2022, can lead to more rapid changes in strategy, while the supervisory board's decisions could be more strongly influenced by the interests of the main shareholder.
Problem loans (Stage 3 loans under IFRS 9) remained low at 1.1% of gross loans as of the end of 2022. The rating agency considers, however, that asset risks remain high given the rapid growth of the loan book (by 62% during 2022) that drives unseasoned risk; untested underwriting standards for new loans through credit cycles; high top borrowers' concentration; and the still material amount of legacy real estate assets on its balance sheet.
The bank's reported Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital ratio of 18.3% as of December 2022, is well above regulatory requirements and supported by a policy of earnings retention and equity injections. However, internal capital generation has been low, which constrains Municipal's ability to withstand potential shocks. Following a loss-making 2021, the bank's return on average equity improved to 4.7% in 2022, benefiting also from low cost of risk (loan loss provisions stood at 0.1% of average gross loans in 2022) and revaluation gains on investment properties.
-- POSITIVE OUTLOOK
The positive outlook on Municipal's long-term deposit ratings is driven by ongoing improvements in the bank's profitability and efficiency (cost-to-income ratio of 83% in 2022) that, if sustained over the next 12-18 months, can support higher loss absorption capacity through earning and stronger internal capital generation.
Net income to tangible assets improved to 0.26% in 2022 from -0.47% in 2021. Based on first half 2023 preliminary reporting by the Bulgarian National Bank (BNB), Municipal's net income to tangible assets improved further to an annualised 1.05%. The bank's management has over the past few years expanded its private sector customer base and loan book, and is focusing on leveraging its niche with Bulgarian municipalities and its large stock of liquid assets more profitably, while also growing fees and commissions and containing its high cost base. The positive outlook on the long-term deposit ratings is linked to the bank maintaining this performance.
Municipal is also a beneficiary of the shift in the interest rate cycle, which increased returns on its assets and eliminated much of the cost of securing deposits from budget entities (mainly Bulgarian municipalities) with placements at the BNB or government securities. In line with monetary policy tightening in Europe, the BNB increased its rate on placements in excess of reserves to 0% during the summer of 2022 from a negative 0.7% in previous years.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Municipal's ratings may be upgraded should it sustain its ongoing improvement in profitability and competitiveness, along with demonstrating a longer performance track record and some seasoning of the loan portfolio with contained losses combined with lower non-lending asset risk.
Changes in the bank's liability structure, such as higher issuances of senior non-preferred debt to meet regulatory requirements, that would significantly increase loss absorbing buffers and reduce losses for senior creditors may also result in a higher notching for deposit ratings from the application of Moody's Advanced LGF analysis.
The outlook on Municipal's long-term deposit ratings would be changed to stable in case the bank fails to sustain improvements in profitability and asset quality. Municipal's ratings could also be downgraded following a deterioration in the bank's solvency, such as from the formation of significant amounts of new problem loans or if capital declines materially, or following an increase in risk appetite resulting from changes in the bank's strategy. Ratings could also face negative pressure following failure to enhance technical, operational and risk systems, as the bank grows and expands.
Changes in the bank's liability structure, mainly a material reduction in the volume of junior deposits or an increase in the bank's reliance on interbank or secured funding, may reduce the uplift provided by Moody's Advanced LGF analysis and result in a downgrade of the bank's ratings.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
