Moody's rates PBF's new notes Ba3; outlook remains positive
New York, August 14, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") assigned a Ba3 rating to PBF Holding Company LLC's (PBF) proposed $500 million of senior unsecured notes due 2030. PBF's other ratings, including the Ba2 Corporate Family Rating (CFR), and positive outlook remain unchanged.
PBF is refinancing its $664.5 million of senior unsecured notes due 2025 with net proceeds from its proposed $500 million bond offering plus cash on its balance sheet.
"PBF's bond refinancing transaction extends the company's debt maturity profile while the use of cash to pay down a portion of debt reduces leverage," commented Jonathan Teitel, a Moody's senior analyst.
Assignments:
..Issuer: PBF Holding Company LLC
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Assigned Ba3
RATINGS RATIONALE
PBF's senior unsecured notes are rated Ba3. This is one notch below the Ba2 CFR and reflects effective subordination to the senior secured revolver with respect to the collateral securing the facility. PBF's notes are not guaranteed by PBF Energy Inc. (PBF's parent company) or PBF Logistics LP (another subsidiary of PBF Energy Inc.).
PBF's Ba2 CFR reflects Moody's expectation for the company's profitability and other credit metrics to remain solid through 2024, with support from continued healthy demand for petroleum products, limited refining capacity, and relatively low inventory levels. PBF benefits from large scale and geographic diversification within the US. The company owns six refineries with combined throughput capacity of approximately 1 million barrels per day (bpd). Given the cyclical nature of the refining business, PBF's EBITDA and cash flows are volatile, leading to swings in leverage. The company has sizable outstanding liabilities to comply with the federal Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) and California's Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). PBF has purchased RINs to reduce this liability and plans to continue to do so over the next several quarters to continue decreasing the balance to maintain lower exposure to these obligations. PBF's parent company, PBF Energy Inc. (PBF Energy), depends on cash distributions from its indirect subsidiaries – PBF Holding Company LLC and PBF Logistics LP – to pay quarterly dividends and to support its share repurchase program. Moody's expects PBF Energy Inc. will manage cash distributions to its shareholders in a balanced manner that is not leveraging for PBF and preserves the company's strong liquidity, including a large cash balance.
In late June 2023, PBF Energy closed on its 50-50 joint venture with Eni Sustainable Mobility (Eni) in St. Bernard Renewables LLC (SBR), a biorefinery co-located with PBF's Chalmette refinery in Louisiana. The biorefinery started operations in June 2023 and produces renewable diesel. PBF Energy contributed the biorefinery and other related assets while Eni committed to make capital reimbursements and contributions totaling $835 million to PBF Energy. Of this amount, Eni paid $431 million at closing. In July 2023, SBR's pre-treatment unit started up, and as a result, Eni paid $414.6 million, including $10.6 million of the $50 million contingent consideration, which PBF Energy contributed to PBF. Eni also brings its experience with two biorefineries in Italy. Production of renewable diesel will generate RINs which PBF Energy will have the right of first offer to purchase from SBR. SBR should be able to make distributions to its owners in the future.
PBF's SGL-1 rating reflects Moody's expectation that PBF will maintain very good liquidity. As of June 30, 2023, the company had $1.5 billion of cash on the balance sheet. PBF has an ABL revolver due January 2025 with $2.85 billion of lender commitments. As of June 30, 2023, the revolver was undrawn and $287 million in letters of credit were issued under the facility. The revolver has a springing minimum fixed charge coverage ratio covenant based on availability under the facility. The company elected to terminate its inventory intermediation agreement that supported several of its refineries at the end of July 2023 and will fund that inventory for these refineries with cash. To terminate the agreement, PBF made a provisional payment of $268 million on July 31, 2023. PBF has a $300 million uncommitted receivables purchase facility.
The positive outlook reflects the potential that if PBF continues to follow these financial policies and maintains low financial leverage and strong liquidity with a prudent approach to shareholder returns then its CFR could be upgraded to Ba1.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
Factors that could lead to an upgrade include PBF management demonstrating adherence to its stated financial policies and maintaining low leverage through the cycle with positive free cash flow and strong liquidity.
Factors that could lead to a downgrade include weakening operating performance, deterioration of liquidity or negative free cash flow, or more aggressive financial policies.
PBF Holding Company LLC, headquartered in Parsippany, NJ, is a subsidiary of PBF Energy Inc., a publicly traded refining company in the US with facilities in multiple states. PBF Energy Inc. is the sole managing member of PBF Energy Company LLC and owns approximately 99.3% of the economic interests in PBF Energy Company LLC (the parent company of PBF Holding Company LLC and the indirect owner of a 50% interest in St. Bernard Renewables LLC). PBF Energy Inc. also owns PBF Logistics LP which primarily owns and operates midstream infrastructure relating to its refineries.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Refining and Marketing published in August 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74331. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
