Moody's affirms Block Financial LLC's Baa3 long term, Prime-3 short term ratings; outlook revised to stable from positive
$1.5 billion of rated debt
New York, August 17, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") affirmed Block Financial LLC's (together with its indirect parent, publicly-traded H&R Block, Inc., "H&R Block" or "Block") senior unsecured rating at Baa3 and short term rating at Prime-3. The outlook was revised to stable from positive.
On Tuesday, tax filing services provider H&R Block reported its fiscal 2023 (ended 30 June) financial and operating results. Although Block's strong credit metrics, including debt to EBITDA below 2.0 times, and robust free cash flow in excess of $400 million expected in 2024 provide strong support to the ratings, Moody's concerns that fewer than expected assisted tax filings in the 2023 tax season and the rising risk of competition from AI-powered consumer tax solutions could keep revenue growth rates in the low single digits over the next three years drove the revision of the outlook to stable from positive. Block's revenue growth during 2023 was around 0.5%, lower than the 3.0% that Moody's was anticipating when the Baa3 and Prime-3 ratings were affirmed and the outlook was revised to positive in late 2022.
"Without pandemic-era incentives that caused more Americans to file US tax returns in prior years, we expect H&R Block will rely on the uncertain success of new products for revenue growth, while AI and other technologies could enable new, low-cost competitors that could limit its historically-strong pricing power," said Edmond DeForest, Moody's Senior Vice President.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Block's Baa3 senior unsecured rating reflects a leading 15% market share, around 75% client retention rates and a widely recognized brand in the assisted tax preparation business, as well as a growing share of DIY tax solutions. H&R Block's strong market position, highly-recognized and well-regarded brand and large revenue scale lead Moody's to anticipate predictable revenues. Moody's expects Block will grow revenue in a low-single-digit range and expand already good EBITA margins of around 24% in FY2023 toward 25% in FY2024. Revenue growth could be boosted if Block's small business and non-tax consumer financial product strategies develop larger customer bases and expand their revenue scale. The preponderance of Block's profits come from the assisted tax filing business and related financial services, including mobile and prepaid banking products, tax refund-related loans and payment processing. Higher average charge per customer in Block's owned and franchised store locations, as well as for H&R Block's do-it-yourself (DIY) products, were achieved in FY2023 through price increases. Block's DIY tax service remains a distant second in terms of market share to the digital DIY tax market leader, TurboTax (owned by Intuit Inc., A3 stable).
The credit profile is constrained by the competitive nature of the industry, featuring low barriers to entry, the extremely seasonal nature of the company's revenues and cash flows and a slow shift by consumers toward DIY tax filing solutions and away from store-based paid providers. The ratings also consider reputational risks associated with data security and customer privacy and compliance risks associated with regulatory and registration requirements placed upon tax preparers by the IRS, as well as the company's conservative financial strategy, as demonstrated by moderate financial leverage and good free cash flow generation.
Moody's expects Block to maintain conservative financial strategies including sourcing cash for shareholder returns from internal sources. Block acquired over $500 million of its own shares during FY2023. Acquisitions have been small, mostly focused on the purchase of its own franchisees, since the approximately $400 million acquisition of Wave Financial, Inc. in 2019. Moody's expects franchise repurchases of between $50 million and $100 million in FY2024, which is consistent with recent years.
All financial metrics reflect Moody's standard adjustments and certain other adjustments. Debt includes $436 million of lease liabilities as of June 2023. Cash and debt at fiscal year-end are calculated as four quarter averages to adjust for the seasonality of the tax business and Block's short-term debt. Moody's expects debt to EBITDA to remain around 2.0 times over the next 12 to 18 months.
Moody's considers Block's liquidity profile as good, with cash and a sizeable revolver balancing the highly seasonal cash inflows. Moody's expects free cash flow in fiscal year 2024 to be over $400 million after capital expenditures of less than $300 million and shareholder dividends of about $200 million. As of 30 June 2023, Block had $987 million of cash and Block's $1.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility due June 2026 (unrated) was undrawn and fully available. The cash balance and revolver are likely to be used to support its highly seasonal working capital needs and for general corporate purposes. Moody's expects Block will use cash and borrowings during its first and second fiscal quarters, as well as during the first half of its fiscal third quarter, to fund operating losses until a surge of cash flow arrives after the IRS begins paying refunds due to Block's customers, mostly during the second half of the third quarter.
The stable outlook reflects Moody's anticipation for revenue growth in a low-single-digit range or lower if economic uncertainties or other factors impact tax filing deadlines, EBITA margins approaching 25% and over $400 million of free cash flow. The stable outlook also considers Moody's rising regulatory and technology-related concerns, which could increase costs for the company or reduce its market share or pricing power.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The ratings could be upgraded if Moody's expects Block will maintain 3% to 5% revenue growth, better balance in profitability between assisted and DIY product lines and debt to EBITDA around 2.0 times.
The ratings could be downgraded if lower tax return volumes, reduced average pricing, diminished income from financial products or increased regulatory pressure or costs cause Moody's to anticipate revenue to decline, debt to EBITDA remains above 2.5 times on a sustained basis or more aggressive financial strategies.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Business and Consumer Services published in November 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/356424. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Moody's took the following rating actions and made the following outlook statement for issuer Block Financial LLC:
..Issuer: Block Financial LLC
.... Backed Commercial Paper, Affirmed P-3
....Backed Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed Baa3
....Backed Senior Unsecured Shelf, Affirmed (P)Baa3
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Positive
H&R Block, Inc. and its subsidiaries provides tax filing and related payment services. The majority of profits are generated by the preparation of tax returns in the company's retail network and through financial settlement products to primarily lower and middle income customers. Moody's expects revenue for the fiscal year ending 30 June 2024 of around $3.5 billion.
