Moody's upgrades Vishay Intertechnology's CFR to Ba2; outlook stable
New York, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) upgraded Vishay Intertechnology Inc.'s (Vishay) ratings, including the Corporate Family Rating (CFR) to Ba2 from Ba3 and Probability of Default Rating (PDR) to Ba2-PD from Ba3-PD.  The outlook is stable.
The upgrade reflects Moody's positive view of Vishay's new corporate strategy, which is focused on strengthening Vishay's customer relationships and product focus. Achieving these objectives requires increasing production capacity both internally and through foundries in support of customer demand. It will also require an enlarged pool of customer-facing engineers to promote Vishay's full product and solutions portfolio.
This initiative, which is being implemented over the next two years, will ultimately produce closer customer relationships and the improved ability to serve growing markets. These efforts should allow for greater penetration opportunities within the existing customer base, which Moody's expects will lead to less variability in revenues and higher profit margins over time. The increased production capacity, both internal and foundry, will enable Vishay to fully participate in the growing industrial and automotive end markets. Chip sales to these end markets are benefitting from spending on factory automation and increased production of electric vehicles and related charging infrastructure. Though the new strategy requires increased capital spending and expanded staffing, Vishay's low financial leverage and very good liquidity will support the credit profile during this period of investment and macroeconomic uncertainty.
The following is a summary of today's rating actions:
Upgrades:
..Issuer: Vishay Intertechnology Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Upgraded to Ba2 from Ba3
.... Probability of Default Rating, Upgraded to Ba2-PD from Ba3-PD
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Vishay Intertechnology Inc.
....Outlook, Remains Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Ba2 CFR reflects Vishay's operating scale and leading market position in the discrete semiconductor and passive electronic components industry. The electronic components industry is highly cyclical which leads to unpredictable shifts in end-market demand. Rapid fluctuations in sales volumes could have on an outsized impact on Vishay's financial performance because of its high fixed costs. This was evident in 2020 with the Covid-related global economic contraction, which followed the inventory-related semiconductor industry contraction in 2019. Amidst the weak global economy, Vishay's distribution partners have been trimming inventory. Moody's expects that this process will continue through the remainder of 2023 and into 2024, with Vishay's revenues declining in the low single digit percent annually through 2024.
Given Vishay's conservative financial policy, leverage should remain modest despite near term weakness in revenues and profitability, with debt to EBITDA (Moody's adjusted) remaining below 2x. Vishay has very good liquidity as illustrated by its net cash position (i.e., cash in excess of reported debt), which is prudent given the cyclical demand for electronic components and the competitive intensity and pricing pressure, especially in its semiconductor product lines. The company mitigates competitive pressure by offering a broad selection of electronic components to customers, deeper engagements with customers through design-in participation, and growth in its specialty components business. Moody's expects Vishay will continue to follow a conservative financial policy, avoiding large, debt-funded acquisitions or returns to shareholders. Vishay will likely maintain very good liquidity, with cash and short-term investments totaling at least 75% of the outstanding debt balance (121% as of July 1, 2023).
The stable outlook reflects Moody's expectation that revenues will decrease in the low single digit percent over the next 12 to 18 months. This decline reflects a modest reduction in chip sales volume as Vishay's customers adjust inventory balances due to the current macroeconomic weakness. Moody's expects that the resulting lower profitability will increase debt to EBITDA (Moody's adjusted) to the upper 1x level (Moody's adjusted) over the next 12 to 18 months, declining later as demand and profitability improve.
The Speculative Grade Liquidity (SGL) rating of SGL-1 reflects Moody's expectation that Vishay will maintain very good liquidity. Moody's expects Vishay will maintain cash and short-term equivalents amounting to at least 75% of the reported debt balance. In addition, Vishay will maintain access to funds under the Revolver, which matures in May 2028, and generate annual free cash flow of over $50 million over the next 12 to 18 months. At July 1, 2023, Vishay reported approximately $1.1 billion in cash and $14 million in short-term investments. The company had $185 million of outstanding borrowings under its $750 million Amended and Restated Credit Facility (Revolver). The Revolver expires in May 2028. Vishay's Credit Facility contains two financial maintenance covenants: (i) Maximum net leverage ratio of 3.25x (net of cash of up to $250 million), and, (ii) Minimum interest expense coverage ratio, defined as EBITDA less capex divided by cash interest expense, of 2.0x. Vishay should maintain ample cushion under the financial covenants over the next 12 months.
The capital structure consists of convertible senior notes (Convertibles; unrated) which lack collateral, leaving the Convertibles effectively subordinated to the Revolver (unrated). The Revolver, meanwhile, benefits from a first priority security interest in a collateral pool consisting of substantially all assets, excluding real estate, of the domestic subsidiaries of the company, and the pledge of stock of certain directly-owned foreign subsidiaries.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Vishay's ratings could be upgraded if the company increases scale and profitability, with the EBITDA margin (Moody's adjusted) sustained at least in the upper twenties percent level. Moody's would expect leverage to remain below 2x debt to EBITDA (Moody's adjusted) and free cash flow to debt (after dividends, Moody's adjusted)) to be sustained at least in the upper single digit percent level. Vishay would also need to maintain very good liquidity, with the sum of cash and short-term investments exceeding the reported debt balance.
Vishay's ratings could be downgraded if revenues decline materially or EBITDA margins (Moody's adjusted) weaken toward the mid-teens percent level on more than a temporary basis. The ratings could also be pressured if Vishay's financial policy becomes more shareholder-friendly through the use of debt-funded shareholder returns or liquidity weakens, with the sum of cash and short-term investments declining to less than 50% of reported debt.
Vishay Intertechnology Inc. is a leading manufacturer and supplier of discrete semiconductors and passive electronic components. The company's discrete semiconductor products include diodes, infrared emitters and detectors (optoelectronic components), and MOSFETs. Its portfolio of passive components includes resistors & inductors and capacitors.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Semiconductors published in September 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74959. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
