Moody's upgrades EQT Corporation to Baa3
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") upgraded the senior unsecured notes ratings of EQT Corporation (EQT) to Baa3 from Ba1. Moody's concurrently withdrew EQT's Ba1 Corporate Family Rating (CFR), Ba1-PD Probability of Default Rating (PDR), and SGL-1 Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating (SGL). The rating outlook was changed to stable from positive.
"The upgrade to Baa3 reflects the considerable deleveraging EQT has achieved since late 2021, its improved capital efficiency and the expectation for continued debt reduction through 2024, aided by attractively priced hedges on a substantial amount of its natural gas production over the next 12 months," said John Thieroff, Moody's Senior Credit Officer. "The recently completed acquisition of the upstream assets of THQ Appalachia I, LLC's (Tug Hill) and gathering and processing assets of THQ-XcL Holdings I, LLC (XcL Midstream) from Quantum Energy Partners further enhances EQT's scale in its core Southwest Appalachia operations and provides greater cash flow durability."
Upgrades:
..Issuer: EQT Corporation
....Senior Unsecured Medium-Term Note Program, Upgraded to (P)Baa3 from (P)Ba1
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Upgraded to Baa3 from Ba1
....Senior Unsecured Shelf, Upgraded to (P)Baa3 from (P)Ba1
Withdrawals:
..Issuer: EQT Corporation
.... Corporate Family Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1-PD
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated SGL-1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: EQT Corporation
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Positive
RATINGS RATIONALE
EQT's upgrade to Baa3 reflects the considerable scale the company has as the largest North American natural gas producer, and improved capital and cost structures such that the company can generate investment grade-level cash flow to debt and return metrics and substantial free cash flow in a $3/mcf NYMEX natural gas price environment. While the company has made good progress in repaying debt in 2022 and the first half of 2023, Moody's expects EQT to achieve more than $2 billion in additional debt reduction by the end of 2024, approaching its long-term absolute debt target of $3.5 billion. Cash flow generation is supported by a strong hedging program through most of 2024 that supports sufficient free cash flow generation to reach this goal.
The Tug Hill acquisition increases EQT's liquids yield and lowers its breakeven pricing, providing greater cash flow resilience in the bottom portions of the volatile natural gas price cycle. The integration provided by the XcL Midstream assets should improve EQT's basis differential, as the XcL system connects to every major long-haul pipeline in southwest Appalachia. The high basis differentials typical of Appalachian producers reflect the basin's constrained takeaway capacity and the steep uphill challenge industry faces to expand it, evidenced most recently by the fierce and extended opposition to the Mountain Valley Pipeline. As an exclusively Appalachian, almost entirely natural gas producer, EQT's basin and commodity concentrations create elevated exposure to infrastructure disruptions and natural gas market imbalances.
EQT's focus on cost reduction, low breakeven costs and debt reduction have strengthened its capacity to withstand negative credit impacts from carbon transition risks. Still, the financial performance of EQT will continue to be influenced by industry cycles. As economies transition, global initiatives to limit adverse impacts of climate change will constrain the use of hydrocarbons and accelerate the shift to less environmentally damaging energy sources. Compared to historical experience, Moody's expects future profitability and cash flow across the sector to be less robust at the cycle peak and worse at the cycle trough. EQT benefits from being a gas producer, given Moody's expectation that natural gas demand will continue to grow longer than oil, though both commodities will face demand peaks followed by gradual decline in the coming years.
EQT has excellent liquidity through 2024. The company built large cash balances in advance of the Tug Hill/XcL Midstream closing and was able to pay more than $1 billion of the approximately $2.2 billion of the cash component (net of a previously paid $150 million deposit) of the acquisition with cash on hand. Pro forma for the acquisition, Moody's expects EQT will have nominal cash on its balance sheet and essentially full availability under its $2.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility expiring in June 2027. Of the more than $2 billion of debt reduction EQT is targeting by the end of 2024, the $1.25 billion pre-payable term loan supporting the Tug Hill acquisition will likely be a key component of debt repayment. Moody's forecasts EQT to generate in excess of $2 billion in free cash flow in 2024, assuming a $3/mcf NYMEX natural gas price and maintenance level capital spending. The company's next debt maturity is a senior note issue due February 2025 with $602 million outstanding as of June 30, 2023, and three more notes totaling $923 million due in 2026. EQT's primary debt covenant limits its debt to capitalization to 65%, and Moody's expects the company to maintain meaningful headroom for future compliance through 2023.
The outlook is stable, based on our expectation that EQT will continue to prioritize debt repayment to reach its debt target of $3.5 billion expeditiously.
Moody's has decided to withdraw the ratings for its own business reasons. Please refer to the Moody's Investors Service Policy for Withdrawal of Credit Ratings, available on its website, https://ratings.moodys.com.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
An upgrade of EQT's rating is possible once the company reaches its long-term debt target of $3.5 billion and consistently demonstrates it can generate a leveraged full-cycle ratio (LFCR) in excess of 2.5x and retained cash flow (RCF) to debt of 60% in a $3/mcf NYMEX natural gas price environment. The rating could be downgraded if RCF/debt falls below 30% or if the LFCR falls below 1.5x. Significant debt funded acquisitions or shareholder payouts at the expense of near -term debt repayment could pressure the ratings.
Pittsburgh, PA-based EQT Corporation is a publicly traded independent exploration and production (E&P) company focused in the Appalachian Basin in the US. It is the largest producer of natural gas in North America, with average daily production in excess of 6 Bcfe pro forma for the recently completed Tug Hill acquisition.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Independent Exploration and Production published in December 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/396736. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
