Moody's affirms Aerodom's Senior Secured Ba3 rating; changes outlook to positive
New York, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's)  has affirmed the Ba3 rating assigned to Aeropuertos Dominicanos Siglo XXI, S.A. ("Aerodom")'s senior secured notes that mature in 2029 and, at the same time, changed its outlook to positive from stable.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Aeropuertos Dominicanos Siglo XXI, S.A.
....Senior Secured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed Ba3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Aeropuertos Dominicanos Siglo XXI, S.A.
....Outlook, Changed To Positive From Stable
RATINGS RATIONALE
The outlook change to positive recognizes the favorable traffic growth prospects for Aerodom underpinned by an ongoing strong travel demand to the Dominican Republic. Additionally, it also considers the anticipated syndicated loan full repayment by 2024 in conjunction with the commencement of the amortization schedule for the senior secured notes extending through 2029, which will contribute to a steady leverage reduction over the next 12-18 months. Furthermore, the rating action recognizes the Government of Dominican Republic (Ba3 positive) outlook change to positive driven by the sustained high growth rates enhancing the scale and wealth levels of the economy. Moody's notes that the ongoing development of the tourism sector, which has expanded into higher-end offerings and more international markets, has contributed significantly to growth in recent years.
The affirmed Ba3 rating considers Aerodom's advantageous service area, in conjunction with the diversified origin and destination (O&D) passenger profile mix and demographics, that have been supporting a robust recovery to pre-pandemic traffic levels, surpassing 2019 annual traffic by 6% during 2022. As of first half of 2023, Aerodom's aggregate traffic has expanded 14% compared to the corresponding period in 2019 leading to enhanced coverage and leverage metrics. Quantitatively, during the first quarter of 2023 Aerodom recorded a LTM 1.92x Moody's Debt Service Coverage Ratio and a LTM Funds from Operations/Debt ratio of 24.3%.
The Ba3 rating continues to recognize the supportive long-term concession agreement that expires in 2030, which extends beyond the notes' tenor in 2029. Additionally, the rating considers a carrier base that continues to be highly diversified with JetBlue Airways Corp. (Ba2 stable) being the main carrier with 23% share of consolidated traffic as of 2022, limiting exposure to airline concentration. Importantly, the Ba3 rating incorporates our assumption of no material additional indebtedness or significant dividend distributions that would weaken key credit metrics.
The liquidity profile as of 1Q2023 considers roughly $89 million that is composed by cash available and a six-month debt service reserve account, that coupled with an annual Funds from Operations of roughly $114 million on average should cover for all the upcoming debt service in the next 2 years without the need to incur additional debt. Moody's notes that the reserve for debt service on the rated bonds is available only through the loan maturity in 2024. That will relatively weaken the credit protections for bondholders during the amortization profile of the senior secured notes in the 2024-29 period. Nonetheless, Aerodom's bondholders will continue to benefit from structural considerations in the debt agreement that include limitations on additional indebtedness and dividend distribution tests.
Moody's ratings base case include the following assumptions:
- Revenue from passengers assumes no update to specialized tariffs.
- Annual increase in passenger traffic of 5% during 2023 and 2024.
- No major CAPEX investments and expansions that would require significant additional funding.
- No material additional indebtedness or significant dividend distributions that would dwindle key credit metrics or significantly weaken liquidity profile.
RATING OUTLOOK
The outlook is positive reflecting our expectation of continuous stable traffic growth performance through 2024 underpinned by a strong travel demand and a diversified passenger profile mix, progressively improving key credit metrics.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
The rating would be upgraded if the air traffic presents stable growth rates after full recovery, followed by the improvement of financial performance leading to an increase in Moody's debt service coverage ratio above 2.3x, on a sustained basis.
The rating could be downgraded if Aerodom faces substantial traffic volatility that reverts the recovery trend, causing liquidity sources to be used. Quantitatively, if cash interest coverage falls below 1.8x or Moody's Debt Service ratio below 1.5x, the rating could be revised downwards.
PROFILE
Aerodom is the operator of six airports in the Dominican Republic through a long-term concession granted by the government with an expiration due 2030. The airport portfolio is composed by Las Americas International Airport in Santo Domingo, the Gregorio Luperón International Airport in Puerto Plata, El Catey International Airport in Samaná, the María Montez International Airport in Barahona, the Arroyo Barril Domestic Aerodrome in Samaná and La Isabela International Airport in Santo Domingo.
On April 2016, VINCI Airports a subsidiary of VINCI S.A. acquired Aerodom from Advent International. This acquisition is considered credit positive for Aeorodom, given the extensive experience of the new operator and synergies that can be implemented to improve operations and performance. VINCI Airports operates over 65 airports worldwide, with Latin American presence in Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic and Mexico.
On January 2017, Aerodom issued $317 million in senior secured notes with a fixed coupon of 6.75% due 2029. The proceeds and a $216 million loan due 2024 were used to prepay the previous existing notes.
The main rated peers in the Latin American region for Aerodom are International Airport Finance, S.A. ("Quiport", Caa2 stable) in Ecuador, Aeropuertos Argentina 2000 S.A. ("AA200", Caa3 stable) in Argentina, ACI Airport Sudamerica, S.A. (Ba1, stable) in Uruguay, Aeropuerto Internacional de Tocumen, S.A. (Baa2 negative) in Panama and the Fideicomiso Irrevocable de Administracion y Pago numero 80460 Reexpresado ("Mexcat", Baa3 stable). These issuers operate under heterogeneous operational environments, regulatory frameworks and with specific passenger profiles. For additional information and comparison on these issuers please visit Moody's website.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Privately Managed Airports and Related Issuers published in September 2017 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/63380. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
