Moody's upgrades Mitsui O.S.K. to Ba2, changes outlook to stable
Tokyo, August 28, 2023 -- Moody's Japan K.K. has upgraded Mitsui O.S.K. Lines, Ltd.'s (MOL) corporate family rating (CFR) to Ba2 from Ba3 and changed the outlook to stable from positive.                
"The upgrade reflects MOL's stronger business profile that supports more stable earnings and cash flow," says Roman Schorr, a Moody's Vice President and Senior Analyst.
"Market conditions in container shipping will remain volatile, but Moody's expects MOL to sustain credit metrics commensurate with a Ba2 rating because of the growing contribution from other, less volatile segments," adds Schorr.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade reflects MOL's progress in strengthening its business profile. In contrast to many peers, the company has controlled dividend payouts. Instead it has reinvested the windfall cash from two exceptionally strong fiscal years into relatively stable businesses such as liquefied natural gas (LNG) carriers running under long-term contracts and real estate, as well as purchasing more energy-efficient vessels.
MOL posted record earnings in the fiscal year ended March 2023 (fiscal 2022), exceeding the previous year's record. The record earnings were driven by favorable market conditions, especially in its containership joint venture (JV), Ocean Network Express Pte. Ltd. (ONE). ONE turned extraordinarily profitable and began paying dividends in fiscal 2020. MOL received around JPY85.2 billion of dividends from ONE in June 2023.
Moody's expects that market conditions will remain challenging over the next 12-18 months for the containership industry as the global fleet is poised to grow. This increased capacity, combined with the debottlenecking of supply chains, will keep containership freight rates below the previous historic highs, reducing ONE's profits and therefore the dividends that MOL will receive from the JV.
However, MOL posted higher earnings across many of its operating segments, including logistics and bulk ships. The growing profit contribution from less volatile segments provides a buffer to limit an increase in leverage even as earnings in the container shipping segment normalize.
MOL plans to invest up to JPY1.2 trillion over fiscal 2023-25, which will drive up its debt. Moody's forecasts that MOL's debt/EBITDA (including equity income from ONE) will trend towards 5.0x over the next 12-18 months, from 1.7x as of the end of fiscal 2022, but remain significantly below the levels in fiscal 2018-19 of almost 8x.
MOL's Ba2 CFR reflects the company's high debt balance, the shipping industry's volatile rates and the company's high investment needs especially in its growth areas. These factors are mitigated by MOL's well-established presence among Japanese shipping companies; its large, diversified shipping portfolio; and the financing flexibility afforded by its mostly unencumbered balance sheet.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
The stable outlook incorporates a degree of decline in containership earnings over the next 12-18 months while reflecting Moody's expectation that MOL will continue to expand its non-containership businesses which will help reduce earnings volatility.
Moody's could upgrade the rating if the company controls its capital allocation in order to better position its balance sheet against earnings volatility. An on-going shift in its business profile that will improve the company's cash flow predictability, including dividends from ONE, will be credit positive. Debt reduction would also be credit positive. Moody's will also consider an upgrade if the company sustains debt/EBITDA below 5.5x and its retained cash flow/net debt trends towards the low teens in percentage terms.
Moody's could downgrade the rating if the company's earnings and cash flow volatility increase. Downward pressure on the rating could also emerge from a more aggressive financial policy including a material increase in shareholder returns or large debt-funded acquisitions or investments that do not result in a commensurate increase in stable cash flow. Weakening liquidity will also be credit negative. Moody's could downgrade the rating if MOL's debt/EBITDA rises above 7.0x or if its retained cash flow/net debt falls to single digits.
The principal methodology used in this rating was Shipping Methodology (Japanese) published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/74070. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Mitsui O.S.K. Lines, Ltd. is headquartered in Tokyo. It is one of the world's largest shipping companies in terms of fleet size.
