Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has revised outlook of Miami-Dade County IDA, FL's Ind. Dev. Rev. Bonds (NCCD - Biscayne Properties LLC Project) Series 2015A to positive from negative. Consequently, Moody's has affirmed B2 rating
New York, August 14, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has revised the outlook of Miami-Dade County IDA, FL's Industrial Development Rev. Bonds, (NCCD - Biscayne Properties LLC Project) Series 2015A  to positive from negative. Consequently, Moody's has affirmed the B2 rating on the Bonds.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The B2 rating affirmation and outlook revision to positive from negative incorporates the full replenishment of the debt service reserve (DSR), gradual improvement in project debt service coverage as exhibited in FY22 audited financial statements as well as increased project occupancy levels, expected to reach full occupancy in Fall 2023 semester.
RATING OUTLOOK
The outlook revision to positive reflects a turnaround in the project's  operating and financial performance, our expectation that the replenished debt service reserve will remain fully funded as well as  our expectation that increased occupancy and rent levels  will continue to translate to improved debt service coverage.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
- Significant and sustained increase in the projects debt service coverage levels
- Sustained strong occupancy and rent levels.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
- Significant decline in debt service coverage levels
- Deterioration in revenue necessitating withdrawals from the DSR fund
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are special limited obligations of the issuer and are secured by a leasehold mortgage, pledged revenues of the project and other funds held with the Trustee and do not constitute obligations of either Florida International University or the bond issuer. The obligations are secured by payments made under the Loan Agreement, a leasehold deed of trust, and amounts held by the Trustee under the Indenture.
PROFILE
The Obligor and Owner, NCCD - Biscayne Properties LLC, is a single member limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of the State of Tennessee. The sole member of the Obligor is National Campus Community Development Corporation, a 501(c)(3) Texas non-profit corporation.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Global Housing Projects published in June 2017 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/64970. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
