Moody's assigns A2 to Los Angeles USD, CA's 2023 Series A COPs; outlook positive
New York, August 09, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned an A2 rating to Los Angeles Unified School District, CA's Certificates of Participation, 2023 Series A.  The certificates of participation (COPs) are expected to be issued in the approximate amount of $384.3 million. Concurrently, Moody's has affirmed the A1 issuer rating for the district, the Aa3 ratings on outstanding general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) bonds and the A2 rating on outstanding COPs.  The outlook is positive. The district has approximately $10.1 billion in outstanding GOULT debt and close to $97.9 million in outstanding COPs, exclusive of the 2023 Series A.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The A1 issuer rating reflects the district's improved financial results, supported by prudent fiscal practices and one-time federal grants offsetting costs associated with the COVID pandemic.  Increases in state funding, despite enrollment losses, have also contributed to favorable results and the district's consistent out performance of budgeted figures. Finances will remain satisfactory, although ongoing enrollment declines and continued budget gaps are expected to reduce reserve levels from historic highs. Resident income levels remain below the national median. However, full value per capita exceeds the median for its peers, and continued growth in the Los Angeles area economy will support future increases. The district's leverage is elevated, although fixed costs remain manageable, and the district has resumed its commitment to making additional deposits annually to its OPEB trust.
The Aa3 rating on the district's GOULT bonds is one notch higher than the district's issuer rating. The one notch distinction reflects California school district GO bond security features that include the physical separation through a "lockbox" for pledged property tax collections and a security interest created by statute.
The A2 rating on the district's COPs is one notch below the issuer rating, reflecting abatement risk and essential leased assets including the district's headquarters and several schools. The district covenants to include COPs payments in annual budgets, and payments are not subject to appropriation risk. All of the district's actively managed general revenue is available for lease payments.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the expectation that the district will develop plans to drive revenues and restrain expenditure growth to support long-term budgetary balance as it confronts ongoing enrollment declines. While the district plans to increase its borrowing from COPs, elevated leverage will remain manageable with the annual COP expense falling below the district's adopted policy of no greater than 2% of general fund expenditures.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Development of credible plan to address structural budget gap
-     Stabilized or growing enrollment trends
-     Significant reduction in leverage
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
-     Enrollment declines that exceed projections or are unaddressed by reductions in expenditures
-     Reductions in reserves or liquidity exceeding projections
-     Meaningful increase in leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The district's COPs are structured with standard California abatement leases on essential property, and the leased property for outstanding COPs largely consists of school buildings and the district's headquarters building. The 2023 Series A COPs are secured by lease payments on one of the district's high schools and the Roybal Learning Center, which includes both classroom space and administrative offices. The district has also identified other school buildings of similar value that could be substituted for leased property if the currently leased schools are not able to be occupied. The district's pre identification of equivalent assets and its willingness to substitute pledged property in the event of abatement serve to offset the risk associated with the district's lack of a debt service reserve.
The district's general obligation bonds are secured by an unlimited property tax pledge of all taxable property within the district boundaries. Debt service on the rated debt is secured by the district's voter-approved unlimited property tax pledge. Los Angeles County (Aa1 stable) rather than the district levies, collects and disburses the district's property taxes, including the portion constitutionally restricted to pay debt service on general obligation bonds.
USE OF PROCEEDS
COP proceeds are anticipated to be used for a number of capital projects and technology purchases that are not eligible for the district's GOULT bond program, do not have GOULT bond authorization, or for which GOULT bond funds are not sufficient. These include cybersecurity and campus security upgrades, electric buses, and site improvements for electric bus charging.
PROFILE
The district encompasses approximately 710 square miles in the western section of Los Angeles County. The district includes virtually all of the City of Los Angeles and all or significant portions of several surrounding cities, including Bell, Carson, Cudahy, Gardena, Huntington Park, Lomita, Maywood, San Fernando, South Gate, Vernon, and West Hollywood, in addition to considerable unincorporated territories devoted to both residential development and industry. The district is the second largest district in the country, with projected enrollment for fiscal 2024 of 413,823, a 2% decline from the prior year. Enrollment in independent charter schools is expected to total around 108,702 for fiscal 2024. Independent charter school enrollment is also declining, but consistently accounts for around 25% of total district enrollment.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US K-12 Public School Districts Methodology published in January 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70054. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
