Moody's upgrades Cheniere Energy, Inc. senior unsecured rating to Baa3, outlook stable
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") upgraded Cheniere Energy, Inc.'s ("CEI") Senior Global Notes rating to Baa3 from Ba1. Moody's concurrently withdrew CEI's Ba1 Corporate Family Rating (CFR), Ba1-PD Probability of Default Rating (PDR), and SGL-1 Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating (SGL). The outlook on CEI's ratings is stable. This rating action concludes the review of CEI's ratings initiated on May 11th, 2023.
Concurrently, Moody's affirmed Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.'s ("CQP") Ba1 Corporate Family Rating (CFR) and Ba1 ratings on its Senior Global Notes. CQP's SGL-3 Speculative Grade Liquidity (SGL) rating was upgraded to SGL-2. The outlook on CQP's ratings is stable.
"Cheniere Energy, Inc. is well positioned to maintain recent improvements in the balance sheet as it benefits from substantial financial flexibility and is able to direct operating cash flows to fund a large share of the expansion of LNG capacity at its Corpus Christi facility," said Elena Nadtotchi, Moody's Senior Vice President.
Affirmations:
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Affirmed Ba1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Affirmed Ba1-PD
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Affirmed Ba1
Upgrades:
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Upgraded to SGL-2 from SGL-3
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy, Inc.
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Upgraded to Baa3 from Ba1
Withdrawals:
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy, Inc.
.... Corporate Family Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1
.... Probability of Default Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated Ba1-PD
.... Speculative Grade Liquidity Rating, Withdrawn , previously rated SGL-1
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.
....Outlook, Remains Stable
..Issuer: Cheniere Energy, Inc.
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Rating Under Review
RATINGS RATIONALE
Cheniere Energy, Inc. (CEI)
The upgrade of CEI's senior unsecured rating to Baa3 follows the upgrade of the ratings of Cheniere Corpus Christi Holdings, LLC (CCH, Baa2 stable). The Baa3 rating is also supported by low stand-alone leverage maintained at CEI.  The upgrade of the ratings also reflects CEI's growing scale, high quality and improved earnings diversification, including significant earnings contribution by Cheniere Marketing, its unencumbered wholly owned subsidiary.
CEI's Baa3 rating recognizes prudent financial policy exercised consistently across the whole organization, effective and proactive management of risks and conservative financing of growth. The Company established a balanced framework that gives priority to reinvestment of operating cash flow in plant expansion and to funding CEI's dividend. The company aims to allocate the remaining free cash flow to debt reduction and to share repurchases in equal measure, while maintaining solid liquidity. This  financial policy also includes a Debt/EBITDA target for its consolidated leverage of below 4x, that Moody's expects CEI to be able to maintain amid normalized pricing conditions in the international natural gas markets.
Strong performance in the Marketing division should keep the company's consolidated leverage below its medium-term target of 4x Debt/EBITDA in 2023. After significant debt prepayments in 2022, CEI's stand-alone leverage trends at around 1x debt/EBITDA and its leverage calculated on a proportionately consolidated basis should trend below 4.5x in the medium term.
By largely debt-financing the construction of the nine operating liquefaction trains across the two project sites to date, CEI has accumulated significant absolute amounts of debt. The company reported almost $16.9 billion of project level debt, in addition to $5.6 billion of intermediate holding company debt at CQP, all of which is structurally senior to the $1.5 billion debt outstanding at CEI as of June 30, 2023.
While debt at CEI is structurally subordinated to substantial amounts of secured project level debt and intermediate holding company debt, CEI's debt service is well supported by residual cash flow generated under long-term, take-or-pay style contracts with strong and largely investment grade rated counterparties across nine fully operational natural gas liquefaction (LNG) trains, as well as by unencumbered cash flow generated by its Marketing subsidiary.
CEI's liquidity position is excellent. As of June 30, 2023, CEI had consolidated balance sheet cash of $2.7 billion (excluding $0.6 billion cash at CQP) and a fully undrawn $1.25 billion revolving credit facility (unrated). CEI's notes mature in 2028.
Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.'s (CQP)
CQP is a master limited partnership (MLP) that is approximately 51% owned by CEI (~49% LP interest and 2% GP interest, wholly-owned by CEI), and 49% by The Blackstone Group Inc., Brookfield Asset Management Inc. and public unitholders. CQP owns Sabine Pass Liquefaction, LLC (SPL, Baa2 stable), a fully operational liquefaction facility with an aggregate nameplate liquefaction capacity of 30 MTPA, consisting of six liquefaction trains, as well as five LNG storage tanks and three marine berths; Sabine Pass LNG, L.P. (SPLNG), a regasification terminal that has been in operation since 2008; and Cheniere Creole Trail Pipeline, L.P. (CTPL), a 94-mile long pipeline that provides natural gas supply transportation to SPL.
CQP's debt service capacity and its Ba1 CFR are underpinned by cash flow and distributions from its operating subsidiaries. CQP benefits from the predictability and recurring nature of anticipated long-dated cash flow from its wholly-owned operating subsidiaries. These positives are balanced by CQP's structurally subordinated position to SPL's leveraged capital structure and significant ongoing distribution requirements, typical for a MLP.
Moody's expects CQP to manage its consolidated leverage close to 4.5x Debt/EBITDA. CQP's significant free cash flow generation is expected to be primarily distributed to unitholders.
CQP's liquidity position is good, as indicated by its SGL-2 SGL rating. As of June 30, 2023, CQP had balance sheet cash of $0.6 billion and the company had a fully undrawn $1 billion revolving credit facility (unrated). CQP's notes will mature in 2029, 2031, 2032 and 2033.
CQP's $5.6 billion senior unsecured notes are rated Ba1, at par with the CFR. The standalone capital structure also includes $1 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility maturing in 2028.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook on CEI's ratings reflects Moody's expectation of CEI's continued robust operating performance and strong cash flow generation in 2023-2024 that should help maintain the improved leverage profile of the company during the construction period at CCH.
CQP's stable outlook mirrors the stable outlook on SPL's ratings and reflects CQP's heavy reliance on distributions from SPL along with consistent cash flow from unrated subsidiaries, CTPL and SPLNG.
Moody's has decided to withdraw the ratings for its own business reasons. Please refer to the Moody's Investors Service Policy for Withdrawal of Credit Ratings, available on its website, https://ratings.moodys.com.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Cheniere Energy, Inc. (CEI)
CEI's ratings could be upgraded in step with upgrades at SPL, CCH, and CQP. The upgrade would also require CEI to maintain solid leverage profile, with Debt/EBITDA below 4.0x, calculated on a proportionate consolidation basis, and below 1x on a stand-alone basis, as well as very good stand-alone liquidity.
CEI ratings could be downgraded as a result of a downgrade of SPL, CCH, or CQP. The ratings could be also downgraded if leverage increases and is sustained above 4.5x debt/EBITDA on proportionate consolidation basis, as a result of a change in financial policy, a material disruption in LNG liquefaction operations, or a deviation in LNG offtake contracting strategy that weakens cash flow certainty.
Cheniere Energy Partners, L.P.'s (CQP)
Given CQP's level of reliance on SPL cash flow, a rating upgrade or downgrade at SPL would likely trigger a similar rating upgrade or downgrade at CQP.
CQP's ratings could be upgraded if its leverage calculated on a consolidated basis is maintained well below 4x Debt/EBITDA and it strengthens its distribution coverage.
CQP's ratings could be downgraded if its Debt/EBITDA leverage calculated on a consolidated basis is maintained above 4.5x.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Midstream Energy published in February 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/379531. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
Cheniere Energy, Inc. is headquartered in Houston, Texas. Through its ownership and operation of two US-based LNG export facilities, Sabine Pass Liquefaction, LLC (SPL, Baa2 stable) and CCH, CEI is established as one of the world's largest LNG exporters. Over 90% of its liquefaction capacity is contracted through the mid-2030s, with the remainder marketed by Cheniere Marketing under arm's length contracts. CQP is a master limited partnership that owns SPL, as well as five LNG storage tanks and three marine berths; Sabine Pass LNG, L.P. (SPLNG), a regasification terminal that has been in operation since 2008; and Cheniere Creole Trail Pipeline, L.P. (CTPL), a 94-mile-long pipeline that provides natural gas supply transportation to SPL.
