Moody's revises Mercy Health Services' (MD) outlook to positive; Baa1 affirmed
New York, August 09, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has affirmed Mercy Health Services' (MHS) (MD) Baa1 revenue bond rating. The outlook has been revised to positive from stable. Total debt outstanding is $381 million as of 2022.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The affirmation of the Baa1 rating underscores MHS' strong performance, characterized by high single digit operating cash flow (OCF) margins. MHS' growing multi-specialty physician group and strategic investment in specialty service lines will support strong demand. Further, MHS will maintain solid liquidity and continue to deleverage given manageable capital spending and the absence of incremental debt plans. MHS will also continue to benefit from Maryland's Global Budget Revenue (GBR), which allows for revenue predictability. Offsetting considerations include a competitive primary service area and measured top line growth given state rate regulations.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the likelihood of credit improvement if MHS sustains operating cash flow margins in the 8%-10% range in 2024, days cash on hand remains strong at around 240 days, and leverage, as measured by cash to debt and debt to revenue, continues to improve.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Continuation of solid operating performance trends, with operating cash flow margin in the 8-10% range
-     Further deleveraging as measured by unrestricted cash and investments to debt and total debt to revenue
-     Maintenance of strong liquidity, with days cash on hand in the 230-240 day range
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Sustained decline in operating performance
-     Weakened leverage as measured by unrestricted cash and investments to debt and total debt to revenue
-     Material and adverse changes to Maryland's rate regulation, which MHS is unable to absorb
LEGAL SECURITY
Bonds are secured by a pledge of receipts from the obligated group and a mortgage on MHS facilities. The debt was issued though the Maryland Health and Higher Educational Facilities Authority for the benefit of bondholders. The obligated group includes the Mercy Health Services parent, Mercy Medical Center, and the Mercy Health Foundation. Additionally, the 2018 issuance is secured by an irrevocable letter of credit, with specific financial covenants related to Stella Maris Inc.
PROFILE
MHS is anchored by Mercy Medical Center (MMC), a 183 licensed bed tertiary referral hospital located in downtown Baltimore. The system also includes multiple physician practices and outpatient sites located throughout the Baltimore area and Stella Maris, Inc. a non-profit corporation that operates a 412 licensed bed long-term care nursing, hospice and rehabilitation facility in Baltimore County. MHS also holds a 50% membership interest in Mercy Ridge, Inc., which owns and operates a continuing care retirement community Baltimore County which consists of 408 independent living units and 47 assisted living units.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Not-For-Profit Healthcare published in December 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70886. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
