Moody's upgrades Cheniere Corpus Christi Holdings, LLC (CCH) senior debt to Baa2 from Baa3; outlook is stable
Approximately $6.4B of debt securities affected
New York, August 24, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service upgraded the rating assigned to Cheniere Corpus Christi Holdings, LLC's (CCH) senior secured notes to Baa2 from Baa3 and revised the outlook to stable.  This rating action concludes our review for possible upgrade initiated on May 11, 2023.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Today's rating action is triggered by strong cash flow generation throughout the Cheniere Energy, Inc. (Cheniere) corporate family that has been used in part to materially reduce CCH's debt load and to fund all costs incurred to date relating to the Stage 3 Liquefaction Project  (Stage 3) expansion project. These actions have positively impacted CCH's financial performance and key financial metrics relative to previous expectations.
Specifically, CCH's debt level has been reduced by $3.8 billion to $6.4 billion as of June 30, 2023 from $10.2 billion at year-end 2021. We calculate CCH's key financial metrics, including debt-to-EBITDA and project cash flow from operations to adjusted debt, at approximately 3.0x and 28%, respectively. Our previously expectation, which did not anticipate significant debt reduction during the Stage 3 construction cycle, was that these metrics would be maintained at more than 4.0x and around 15%, respectively.
Stage 3 involves the construction of seven midscale trains with an aggregate capacity of about 10.4 MTPA of liquefied natural gas located adjacent to the operating three-train 15 MTPA liquefaction facility. More than $2.0 billion of budgeted costs relating to Stage 3 have been spent, all of which has been funded with internal cash flow or contributed equity. Commercial operation of the first of the expansion trains is expected to occur in late 2025 with full commercial operations expected in early 2027. CCH currently estimates that Stage 3 construction is 38% complete. Today's rating action assumes continued construction progress within the timeline and budgetary parameters outlined by CCH.
Almost all of the capacity associated with Stage 3 has been contracted with creditworthy third parties.  We expect annual recurring fixed fees upon full commercialization of Stage 3 at approximately $3.3 billion compared to approximately $2.2 billion currently.
Stage 3 is being constructed by Bechtel Inc. (Bechtel) under a fixed-price, turnkey engineering, procurement, and construction contract.  Bechtel's involvement in Stage 3 is viewed positively and a rating consideration as it is an experienced contractor, having completed 9 trains totaling 30 MTPA (including CCHs existing 3 trains) for Cheniere on-time and budget.  CCH has entered into a seven-year senior secured term loan facility due 2029 with a bank group as a funding source for Stage 3 and has $3.3 billion of currently undrawn commitments. The term loan facility ranks pari passu with all its senior secured notes and working capital facility and was undrawn as of June 30, 2023.
Today's upgrade assumes full usage of CCH's $3.3 billion term loan facility to fund remaining Stage 3 costs, increasing the debt load to approximately $9.7 billion from $6.4 billion currently.  Our rating action recognizes that this level of debt will be supported by an approximate 26 MTPA export facility which compares favorably to CCH's $10.2 billion of debt at year-end 2021 that was then supported by a 15 MTPA facility.
We expect CCH to maintain debt-to-EBITDA and project cash flow from operations to adjusted debt at around 4x and 20%, respectively, through 2024.  Almost full usage of the term loan facility by year-end 2025, however, will temporarily drive these metrics moderately lower before improving with full commercialization in 2027.  Our base case assumes a run rate of less than 4 times and more than 20%, respectively, beginning 2027.
Rating Outlook
The stable outlook is driven by an expectation that CCH's financial and operating performance will remain in line with our expectation and that progress relating to Stage 3 construction continues on time and within the budget.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Factors that could lead to an upgrade
An upgrade is not anticipated over the remaining construction cycle for Stage 3.  Longer-term, consideration of an upgrade could occur if CCH's weighted counterparty credit quality moderately improved and CCH is able to consistently produce significantly stronger-than-anticipated key financial metrics, such as project cash from operations to debt comfortably in excess of 25%, debt to EBITDA of less than 3.5x and debt service coverage in excess of 6x.
Factors that could lead to a downgrade
Delays or significant costs overruns associated with substantial completion of Stage 3 may trigger negative rating pressure.
PROFILE
CCH owns Corpus Christi Liquefaction Project (CCL), a three train LNG project in Corpus Christi, Texas with a current capacity of 15 MTPA,  CCL Stage 3, and Cheniere Corpus Christi Pipeline, L.P. (CCP), a 21.5-mile long natural gas pipeline which brings feedstock to CCL from various intrastate and interstate pipelines. CCH is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Cheniere Energy Inc.
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Generic Project Finance Methodology published in January 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/361401. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
