Moody's upgrades Sagax to Baa2, outlook stable
Stockholm, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today upgraded AB Sagax (Sagax or the company) long-term issuer rating to Baa2 from Baa3. Sagax is a leading property company focused on urban logistics and light industrial assets predominantly in the Nordics. Concurrently, Moody's has upgraded the ratings on the Backed Euro Medium Term Note Programme to (P)Baa2 from (P)Baa3 of Sagax EURO MTN AB (publ), Sagax EURO MTN NL B.V and the senior unsecured bond rating to Baa2 from Baa3. The outlook was changed to stable from positive for all three entities.
A full list of affected ratings is provided at the end of the press release.
RATINGS RATIONALE
"The upgrade to Baa2 reflects Sagax continued strong operating and financial performance driven by a focused investment strategy in urban logistics and light industrial assets with close proximity to bigger cities," says Maria Gillholm, the lead analyst for Sagax. "A growing rental income supported by a recent equity increase supported a strengthening of the company's credit metrics, which we expect to be sustained going forward", Mrs. Gillholm continues."In addition, Sagax relatively solid liquidity profile with an extended debt maturity schedule support the current rating", adds Mrs. Gillholm.
The rating action further considers the company's good market position and its diversified tenant base in several countries with long-dated rental contracts, a key strength that underpins the portfolio's stability even in a weaker macroeconomic environment. Rental income has been resilient throughout the pandemic and is currently growing, evidenced in a like-for-like rental growth of about 6%, underpinned by the overall credit quality of Sagax tenant base and indexation-clauses.
Sagax is a disciplined and opportunistic buyer with a growth track record through value accretive acquisitions with an increasing geographic diversification beyond its core markets Sweden and Finland. Sagax enjoys good access to debt and equity capital and we expect the company to preserve the current capital structure.
Sagax effective leverage is moderate compared with many of its European real estate peers, evidenced by a debt to asset ratio of 43.6%, a net debt/EBITDA of 8.1x and a strong fixed-charge coverage of 7.0x as per LTM June 2023. The recent leverage improvements were supported by (1) continued rental growth, (2) contributions from recent acquisitions and (3) benefits of the recent capital increase.
LIQUIDITY
Moody's estimate that Sagax has a good liquidity profile over the next 18 months considering SEK 9.9 billion in committed partly secured revolving facilities maturing largely 2024-2027, SEK 22 million of cash and  expected operating cash flow of SEK 4.5 billion (including dividend received from joint ventures and associated companies). We also view Sagax ability to raise cash SEK 4.5 billion by exercising its put option for the 15% holding in Hemsö Fastighets AB against the state-owned Third Swedish National Pension Fund that owns the remaining 85%.
In addition we consider Sagax holdings of aggregate  SEK 10.5 billion in Hemsö and listed companies as alternative liquidity, but the value varies.
Sagax liquidity outflows over the next 18 months of in total around SEK 9.2 billion (a maturing bond, bank debt, commercial paper, dividends, capex, acquisitions). Sagax has adequate headroom under financial covenants in bank loan and bond documentations.
OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects our expectation that Sagax will continue to deliver solid operational performance, keeping high occupancy, resulting in stable cash flow, good liquidity on a sustained basis and preserves its solid credit metrics. We expect Sagax to maintain effective leverage below 45% while continuing its balanced growth strategy.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE
» Continued growth of its asset base and diversifying its tenant base while maintaining a long average lease term and positive operating KPI's
» Sustaining effective leverage well below 40% and net debt/EBITDA around 7x with financial policies that support continued expectation of lower leverage
» Fixed charge coverage ratio of above 6x on a sustained basis in a normalized interest environment
» Maintained strong liquidity
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE
» Deterioration in the operating performance, including further reduction in the average lease tenor, which is not counterbalanced by lower leverage, or if property market fundamentals weaken sharply
» Moody's adjusted effective leverage above 45% on a sustained basis or if Moody's-adjusted net debt/EBITDA of above 8x on a sustained basis
» Fixed charge coverage ratio falling below 4x
» Failure to maintain good liquidity, an adequate unencumbered asset base as well as a staggered maturity profile with substantial buffers to covenants
ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL AND GOVERNANCE CONSIDERATIONS
ESG considerations have a neutral to low credit impact (CIS-2) on AB Sagax. This reflects the company's moderate financial policies which enables it to manage exposure towards environmental and social risk.
LIST OF AFFECTED RATINGS
Upgrades:
..Issuer: AB Sagax
....LT Issuer Rating, Upgraded to Baa2 from Baa3
....Senior Unsecured Medium-Term Note Program, Upgraded to (P)Baa2 from (P)Baa3
....Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Upgraded to Baa2 from Baa3
..Issuer: Sagax EURO MTN AB (publ)
....BACKED Senior Unsecured Medium-Term Note Program, Upgraded to (P)Baa2 from (P)Baa3
....BACKED Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Upgraded to Baa2 from Baa3
..Issuer: Sagax EURO MTN NL B.V
....BACKED Senior Unsecured Medium-Term Note Program, Upgraded to (P)Baa2 from (P)Baa3
....BACKED Senior Unsecured Regular Bond/Debenture, Upgraded to Baa2 from Baa3
Outlook Actions:
..Issuer: AB Sagax
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Positive
..Issuer: Sagax EURO MTN AB (publ)
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Positive
..Issuer: Sagax EURO MTN NL B.V
....Outlook, Changed To Stable From Positive
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was REITs and Other Commercial Real Estate Firms published in September 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/393395. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
