Moody's affirms Debeka Bausparkasse's Baa3 deposit ratings; changes outlook to positive
Frankfurt am Main, August 08, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) has today affirmed the Baa3/P-3 long- and short-term deposit ratings of Debeka Bausparkasse AG (Debeka), and its Baa2/P-2 long- and short-term Counterparty Risk Rating. Moody's changed the outlook on the bank's long-term deposit ratings to positive from stable. Concurrently, the rating agency has affirmed Debeka's ba1 Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) and Adjusted BCA, as well as the bank's Baa1(cr)/P-2(cr) long- and short-term Counterparty Risk Assessment.
RATINGS RATIONALE
-- AFFIRMATION OF DEBEKA'S BASELINE CREDIT ASSESSMENT
The affirmation of Debeka's ba1 BCA reflects the bank's strengthened ability to absorb expected near-term operating losses, following a €120 million capital injection provided by its parent in 2022 [1] and the pronounced upward shift in market interest rates. The latter on the one hand alleviates acute profitability issues and supports a recovery of Debeka's depressed net interest income while it has on the other hand resulted in a significant gap between market value and accounting value of its securities portfolio. The affirmation further reflects that the bank remains exposed to significant risks from any future large change of the yield curve.
During the extended low interest rate environment, Debeka experienced a severe compression in net interest margins which mainly reflected a high interest burden on its retail deposit contracts under which German building and loan associations, including Debeka, promise fixed interest rate payments. Debeka reduced these fixed rates for new contracts only well after the entry into the low market interest rates environment, which left the bank in a vulnerable strategic position. Accelerating progress in reducing its exposure to legacy high-rate contracts, together with repeated capital injections, have in conjunction with an increase in market interest rates significantly reduced the pressure on Debeka's business prospects, so that Moody's now anticipates that the building and loan association will be able to reduce its losses and initiate a turn-around towards becoming profitable over the medium term.
Debeka has a very defensive funding profile with rather limited market funding reliance, underpinned by the predominance of its  granular retail deposits base paired with government-sponsored funding through development bank programs. Against this background, Moody's expects the building and loan association to be adequately shielded against the risk of liquidity stress.
While the normalization in rates provides tailwinds for Debeka, its management has yet to prove that it appropriately addresses strategic vulnerabilities of its business model to adverse interest rate movements. Accordingly, the rating agency continues to apply a negative corporate behavior adjustment to Debeka's financial profile.
Debeka's solvency remains supported by the strong credit quality of its granular residential mortgage loan book, which the bank underwrites within the tight framework set by the German building and loan association's act. At the same time, this narrow specialization restricts Debeka's business diversification and Moody's considers the bank's activities to follow a monoline business model approach.
-- AFFIRMATION OF THE DEPOSIT RATINGS              
The affirmation of Debeka's Baa3/P-3 deposit ratings as well of the bank's Baa2/P-2 Counterparty Risk Rating reflects the affirmation of Debeka's ba1 BCA as well as unchanged results from Moody's Advanced Loss Given Failure (LGF) analysis for these liability classes, which takes into account Moody's expected loss severity in case of failure. The combination of Debeka's moderate volumes of instruments that absorb losses prior to deposits and the bank's high share of retail deposits (resulting in a lower share of junior deposits) limit the loss protection and dilute the rating uplift according to Moody's Advanced LGF analysis.
The ratings continue to reflect no uplift from government support, because of the bank's very small size relative to the German banking system.
-- OUTLOOK CHANGE TO POSITIVE FROM STABLE
The outlook change to positive from stable on the long-term deposit ratings reflects Moody's expectation that Debeka's profitability will recover from its very depressed levels, which would reduce future capital needs of the bank.
In particular, Moody's expects Debeka to benefit from a sustained higher interest rates environment, that both reduces the immediate drag from fixed interest expenses and allows Debeka to secure higher new lending margins and asset yields.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Debeka's ratings could be upgraded as a result of an upgrade of its BCA. A rating upgrade for individual debt classes could also be driven by a change in Debeka's liability structure that results in additional notches of rating uplift, particularly if (junior) senior unsecured debt components and subordinate debt were to account for a materially higher share of Debeka's total liabilities.
An upgrade of Debeka's BCA could result if Debeka manages to improve its profitability while maintaining adequate liquidity buffers and significantly reducing its vulnerability to interest rate risk.
Debeka's ratings could be downgraded in case of a downgrade of its BCA. Debeka's ratings may also be downgraded upon a change in its liability structure, particularly if the amount of (junior) senior unsecured debt and subordinate debt declines from current levels. This could result in higher-than-expected loss severity for Debeka's depositors and, therefore, lower rating uplift.
Debeka's BCA could be downgraded if unexpectedly high losses, especially if triggered by strong market interest rate moves, were to weaken its solvency or if the bank faced unexpectedly high liquidity outflows that would adversely change Debeka's funding and liquidity profile.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
