Moody's assigns initial Baa3 to Far North Fort Worth MUD No. 1, TX's GOs; outlook positive
New York, August 18, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has assigned an initial Baa3 general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) rating to Far North Fort Worth Municipal Utility District No. 1, TX's estimated $9.5 million Unlimited Tax Road Bonds, Series 2023. Moody's has also assigned a positive outlook. Post issuance the district will have approximately $40.1 million in debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The Baa3 rating balances the district's elevated debt levels with a moderately concentrated but rapidly growing tax base. The rating also reflects the district limited financial history matched by narrow and nominal reserve levels that are adequate compared to revenue. Finally, the rating incorporates the district's favorable location in proximity to the City of Fort Worth (Aa3 stable) which will support demand for residential property over the next several years and above average resident incomes.
Governance is a key driver for all initial rating actions. The lack of active management is a negative consideration for the district even though this management consideration is common for municipal utility districts in Texas. The district has no employees and contracts out for critical services. However, debt issuance must be approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. Positively, the district does not have pension or other post-employment liabilities.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the expectation that taxable assessed value will continue to grow in the near term as development in the district continues and as homes are sold. It also reflects the expectation that the district's financial reserves will continue to grow, driven by tax base growth and limited operating responsibility.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Sustained tax base growth
-     Decrease in debt levels as a percentage of assessed valuation
-     Material growth in financial reserve levels
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Growth in debt levels absent corresponding tax base growth
-     Decline in financial reserve levels
LEGAL SECURITY
Principal of and interest on the bonds are payable from the proceeds of a continuing direct annual ad valorem tax, without legal limitation as to rate or amount, levied upon all taxable property within the district.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds of the bonds will be used to reimburse developers for road improvement and related costs including six months of capitalized interest and developer interest.
PROFILE
Far North Fort Worth MUD No. 1 provides road, water, and wastewater infrastructure to a primarily residential area in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fort Worth in Tarrant, Wise, and Denton counties, approximately 17 miles northwest of downtown Fort Worth. The district contains approximately 734 acres of land with an estimated population of 2,422 in 2023.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
