Moody's upgrades to Baa1 Montgomery County MUD 105, TX's GOULT; outlook stable
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded to Baa1 from Baa2 Montgomery County Municipal Utility District 105, TX's general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) rating. Moody's has also assigned a Baa1 rating to the district's Unlimited Tax Bonds, Series 2023 with a proposed par amount of about $4.6 million, Unlimited Tax Road Bonds, Series 2023 with a proposed par amount of about $1.2 million and Unlimited Tax Park Bonds, Series 2023 with a proposed par amount of  approximately $7.8 million. Post-issuance, the district will have approximately $79 million debt. The outlook is stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade to Baa1 reflects the district's moderately-sized tax base with a trend of robust growth that has begun to subside as residential development in the district is complete. Resident income within the district is solid and while the district's reserves continue to strengthen through operating surpluses, they remain below similarly rated peers. The rating further reflects the district's very high debt burden and lack of pension and OPEB liabilities.
RATING OUTLOOK
The stable outlook reflects the expectation that the debt burden will remain high, but steady with limited future borrowing plans and that reserves will continue to improve over the next few years.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Materially higher reserves relative to revenue
- Moderation of the debt burden
- Continued tax base growth
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Material increase in the debt burden
- Narrowing of reserves or liquidity
LEGAL SECURITY
The bonds are payable from the proceeds of separate continuing direct annual ad valorem taxes levied, without legal limitation as to rate or amount, against all taxable property within the district.
USE OF PROCEEDS
Bond proceeds will be used to reimburse developers for costs of constructing the road, utility and park and recreation systems and to pay for engineering costs related to the financed utility and road facilities.
PROFILE
Montgomery County MUD 105 is in southern Montgomery County, TX (Aaa stable), roughly 30 miles from Houston (Aa3 stable), and within Conroe Independent School District (Aa1 stable). The district encompasses 738 acres and has an estimated population of 3,800.
METHODOLOGY
      The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
