Moody's upgrades to Ba2 McCamey County Hospital District, TX's issuer and GOLT ratings; revises outlook to positive
New York, August 11, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded to Ba2 from Ba3 McCamey County Hospital District, TX's issuer rating and revised the outlook to positive from stable. Concurrently, Moody's has also upgraded to Ba2 from B1 the rating on the district's general obligation limited tax (GOLT) bonds. The district has approximately $20 million of outstanding GOLT debt.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade of the issuer rating reflects the recent trend of tax base growth, coupled with improving financial performance resulting in strengthened liquidity levels. The rating also incorporates the district's highly concentrated tax base in the oil and gas sector, which has resulted in historical assessed value volatility, along with below average resident incomes and declining population. The rating further reflects the district's small operations, exposure to competitive enterprise risk from the hospital's operations, as well as a manageable debt profile.
The upgrade of the GOLT rating to Ba2, which is the same level as the issuer rating, reflects the increased taxing margin under the property tax cap leading to less likelihood that revenue from operations will be needed to support debt service. The lack of distinction between the issuer and GOLT ratings also reflects the ample taxing headroom under the tax cap, which provides more than 370% (3.7x) coverage of debt service, offsetting the district's inability to exceed the  limited tax rate cap and lack of a full faith and credit pledge.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the expectation that continued growth and diversification of the tax base, along with further improvement of operating margins and liquidity could lead to upward rating action.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Growth and diversification of assessed value
- Significant increase in liquidity
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Material reduction in liquidity or operating margins
- Contraction of assessed value
- Significant increase in leverage
LEGAL SECURITY
The general obligation limited tax bonds are payable from an ad valorem tax levied within the limits prescribed by law on all taxable property within the district. The tax rate is limited to $7.50 per $1,000 assessed valuation for all purposes.
PROFILE
McCamey County Hospital District is in Upton County in west Texas. Its boundaries are coterminous with McCamey Independent School District. The hospital is a critical access hospital with 14 licensed beds for both acute and swing bed care. The district also operates a 30-bed nursing home facility, a rural health clinic, wellness center, cardiology clinic, and physical therapy clinic. As of 2021, the district had an estimated population of 2,000.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was US Special Purpose District General Obligation Debt Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/394972. An additional methodology used in these ratings was Not-For-Profit Healthcare published in December 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70886. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
