Moody's upgrades Moorhead, MN's GO, issuer and combined utility revenue ratings to Aa2; assigns Aa2 to new GO bonds
New York, August 30, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded the City of Moorhead, MN's issuer and general obligation unlimited tax (GOULT) rating to Aa2 from Aa3. Moody's also upgraded the rating on Moorhead Combined Utility Enterprise, MN's outstanding public utility revenue bonds to Aa2 from Aa3. Moody's assigns a Aa2 rating to the city's General Obligation Improvement Bonds, Series 2023A, expected to have a par value of about $16 million. Following the sale, the city will have roughly $220 million in total debt outstanding.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The issuer rating was upgraded to Aa2 because the city has a very strong financial position, a growing local economy that serves as a regional economic hub and moderate long-term liabilities and fixed costs. Resident income and full value per capita are solid but slightly below Aa-rated medians.
The Aa2 GOULT rating is the same as the issuer rating, reflecting the city's full faith and credit pledge and the authority to levy a dedicated property tax unlimited as to rate and amount.
The combined utility revenue debt was upgraded to Aa2 because the system has a strengthened liquidity position, low debt ratio and solid debt service coverage, which is supported by strong local rate-setting authority. The system has moderate customer concentration.
RATING OUTLOOK
Moody's does not typically assign outlooks to local governments with this amount of debt.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Substantial strengthening of economic metrics
- Moderated long-term leverage and/or fixed costs
- Significant expansion of the customer base (combined utility)
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
- Significant, sustained narrowing of financial position
- Materially increased leverage and/or fixed costs
- Materially reduced liquidity (combined utility)
- Significantly increased leverage (combined utility)
LEGAL SECURITY
The GOULT bonds are backed by the city's full faith and credit pledge and the authority to levy a dedicated property tax unlimited as to rate and amount. The GOULT bonds are additionally secured by statute. The city plans to use special assessments levied against benefited properties to repay the 2023A bonds.
Debt service on outstanding utility revenue bonds is payable from net revenues of the combined utility.  
USE OF PROCEEDS
Proceeds will finance various improvement projects within the city.
PROFILE
The City of Moorhead is located on the Minnesota (Aaa stable)-North Dakota (Aa1 stable) border across the Red River from the City of Fargo, ND (Aa2 stable). It encompasses roughly 22 square miles and serves as the seat for Clay County. It provides a range of municipal services, including public safety, public works, libraries and parks, and municipal utilities, to nearly 45,000 residents.
Moorhead's Combined Utility Enterprise is a combined electric and water system. It is operated by the Moorhead Public Service (MPS) Commission, a six-member commission appointed by the City Council.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in the issuer and general obligation ratings was US Cities and Counties Methodology published in November 2022 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/386953. The principal methodology used in the revenue ratings was US Public Power Electric Utilities with Generation Ownership Exposure published in January 2023 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/398041.  Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of these methodologies.
