Moody's assigns Baa2 rating to OSB Group's £300 million senior unsecured notes; upgrades OneSavings Bank plc's long-term deposit and issuer ratings to Baa1
London, August 31, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service ("Moody's") has today affirmed the baa2 Baseline Credit Assessment (BCA) and Adjusted BCA of OneSavings Bank plc (OSB) and upgraded the bank's long-term deposit and issuer ratings to Baa1 from Baa2. Moody's also upgraded OSB's long-term Counterparty Risk Ratings (CRRs) to A3 from Baa1 and affirmed short-term CRRs and deposit ratings at P-2, and upgraded long- and short-term Counterparty Risk (CR) Assessments to A2(cr)/P-1(cr) from A3(cr)/P-2(cr). Following the upgrade of the bank's long-term issuer and deposit ratings, the outlook on these ratings was changed to stable from positive.
In the same rating action, Moody's assigned a Baa2 rating with a stable outlook to OSB GROUP PLC's (OSBG) proposed senior unsecured notes in the amount of GBP300 million. The notes will be issued under OSBG's Euro Medium Term Note (EMTN) programme, to which Moody's has assigned (P)Baa2 senior unsecured and (P)Baa3 subordinated ratings. Moody's also affirmed OSBG's long-term issuer ratings at Baa2 and its subordinated debt ratings at Baa3. The outlook on OSBG's long-term issuer ratings remain stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE
Today's rating actions were triggered by OSBG planning to issue GBP300 million of senior unsecured callable notes under its EMTN programme to comply with new interim minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL), which will come into effect in July 2024.
The senior unsecured debt rating of Baa2 assigned to OSBG's senior unsecured notes reflects the OSB's BCA of baa2; Moody's expectation of moderate loss severity for this instrument under its Advanced Loss Given Failure (LGF) analysis, given the instrument volume and the previously issued Tier 2 subordinated debt at the holding company level, which results in the unsecured holding company debt rating being positioned at the same level as the bank's Adjusted BCA; and a low probability of support from the Government of the United Kingdom (UK, Aa3 negative), which does not result in any further rating uplift.
Concurrently, and as a result of OSBG's planned issuance of GBP300 million MREL debt, Moody's upgraded OSB's long-term deposit and issuer ratings, reflecting the expectation of reduced loss severity for these instruments under the Advanced LGF analysis. OSB's long-term deposit and issuer ratings are now positioned one notch above the bank's Adjusted BCA of baa2, indicating a low loss-given-failure for these instruments due to higher levels of subordination. These ratings also incorporate a low probability of support from the UK, which does not result in any further rating uplift.
The affirmation of OSB's baa2 BCA reflects the bank's historically solid profitability, despite the recent negative adverse effective interest rate-related (EIR-related) revaluation, underpinned by its excellent efficiency, and its sound risk-based capitalisation and nominal leverage. The BCA also reflects higher credit risk of OSBG's loan portfolio as compared to traditional retail banks, given its focus on specialty loan products, which are more susceptible to losses during economic downturns, particularly considering the bank's focus on clients with non-standard credit profiles and near-prime credit characteristics. While OSBG's loan portfolio has had solid credit performance since the bank's inception in 2011, its relatively short track record was built in a benign credit environment.
The baa2 BCA also reflects OSBG's primarily retail deposit funding mix and its evolving wholesale market funding profile, predominantly consisting of central bank funding, mostly in the form of the Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for SMEs (TFSME), which the bank will have to replace in the next three years. As of 30 June 2023, OSBG's TFSME debt amounted to GBP4.2 billion, significantly surpassing the aggregate amount of its other wholesale funding borrowings and its high-quality liquid assets (HQLA buffer) of GBP3.1 billion. Replacement of its TFSME borrowings with a combination of secured and unsecured retail deposit and wholesale funding should be achievable but may, depending on market and competitive conditions, place some strain on profitability or potentially, in the extreme, result in a curtailment of lending relative to plan.
OUTLOOK
The revision of the outlook to stable from positive on the long-term deposit and issuer ratings assigned to OSB reflects limited rating upside from additional MREL issuances. The stable outlook on OSBG's and OSB's long-term ratings also reflects Moody's expectation that the bank will demonstrate solid financial performance in the next 12-18 months, with well-managed assets and solid profitability, consistent with the baa2 BCA positioning.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
Sustained levels of core profitability and capitalisation, well-managed asset quality, as well as further diversification of the wholesale funding mix and successful repayment of the TFSME could lead to a higher BCA. Further debt issuances by OSBG in order to satisfy its future MREL requirements are unlikely to lead to a further upgrade of OSB's deposit and issuer ratings, as reflected in the revised stable outlook of these ratings.
Weakened profitability, weak credit management, as evidenced by spikes in delinquencies and problem loans, material reduction in capital through distribution of equity to shareholders beyond capital targets borrowings, or a significantly delayed or more costly repayment of TFSME borrowings  could result in a downgrade of OSB's BCA. In addition, reduction in the stock of bail-in-able debt could result in downgrade of OSBG's long-term issuer ratings.
An upgrade or downgrade of OSB's BCA will likely lead to a corresponding change in all long-term ratings and assessments.
PRINCIPAL METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Banks Methodology published in July 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/71997. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
