Moody's places Stephen F. Austin State University's (TX) A1 under review for upgrade
New York, August 25, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has placed the A1 issuer and bond ratings for Stephen F. Austin State University (SFA), TX on review for possible upgrade following the announcement that SFA will be affiliated as a member of The University of Texas System (Aaa stable), effective September 1, 2023. SFA's revenue bonds were issued through the Board of Regents of Stephen F. Austin State University. The university had $200 million of outstanding debt as of fiscal year end 2022. Previously, the outlook was stable.
RATINGS RATIONALE / FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OR DOWNGRADE OF THE RATINGS
The review for upgrade follows a voluntary notice by The University of Texas System, pursuant to SB 1055 of the 88th Texas Legislature, announcing plans to integrate SFA into the UT System, effective September 1, 2023. The UT System would assume management and operational control of SFA, but not limited to its operations, real property and other assets. While SFA will be joining the UT System's revenue financing system with the change in governance, its outstanding revenue bonds, approximately $200 million, are expected to continue to be secured solely by the pledged revenues of the SFA enterprise, a distinct pledge compared to the broader UT System revenue financing system pledge.
The review also reflects the planned change in organizational structure, with SFA joining the UT System, which is a key governance consideration under Moody's ESG framework. Assuming completion of the SFA transition into the UT system, Moody's expects that the rating on SFA's bonds will be placed relative to the UT System's Aaa issuer rating and will consider the limited nature of the pledged revenues of SFA's bonds relative to UT's overall revenues.
The rating of SFA's outstanding revenue bonds could be upgraded due to its affiliation within the Aaa-rated University of Texas System. The rating on the SFA bonds will be determined using the UT System issuer rating and notching down to account for the narrower security pledge of the SFA bonds.
LEGAL SECURITY
SFA's revenue financing system debt is secured by a gross revenue pledge. Pledged revenues include SFA student tuition, fees and auxiliary revenue and unappropriated or reserve fund balances but exclude state appropriations. A rate covenant requiring the university to set pledged revenues sufficient to meet financial obligations provides additional bondholder security. Fiscal 2022 pledged revenues of $66 million provide a solid approximately 2.9x gross coverage of estimated maximum annual debt service (MADs) of $22.7 million.
PROFILE
Stephen F. Austin State University is located in the east Texas city of Nacogdoches and has additional sites including a university farm, an experimental forest and a forestry field station. The university enrolled over 10,000 full-time equivalent (FTE) students in fall 2022 and had operating revenue of nearly $199 million in fiscal 2022.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in these ratings was Higher Education Methodology published in August 2021 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/72158. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
