Moody's upgrades Capital Region Medical Center (MO) to Ba1; outlook revised to positive
New York, August 10, 2023 -- Moody's Investors Service has upgraded Capital Region Medical Center's (CRMC) (MO) revenue bond rating to Ba1 from Ba2. Concurrently, the outlook has been revised to positive from negative. The system has $42 million of outstanding debt as of fiscal 2022.
RATINGS RATIONALE
The upgrade to Ba1 is driven by the successful attainment of a forbearance agreement through January 2, 2024 and the execution of a reorganization agreement with the University of Missouri. This agreement will further strengthen the relationship between the two systems, with the University of Missouri providing payor leverage, the ability to access a vast network of clinical resources and full oversight over operations. Offsetting considerations include weak operating cash flow and days cash on hand at CRMC, which management anticipates will incrementally improve over several years as turnaround strategies gain traction.
RATING OUTLOOK
The positive outlook reflects the potential for credit improvement as the relationship between CRMC and the University of Missouri System (Aa1 stable) solidifies, including the potential to integrate operations and/or transfer assets to the University of Missouri.
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO AN UPGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Successful execution of strategic partnership as a full member of the University of Missouri or further strengthening of the relationship
-     Materially improved and sustained operating performance, which allows for increased liquidity and headroom to covenants
FACTORS THAT COULD LEAD TO A DOWNGRADE OF THE RATING
-     Adverse changes to the relationship with the University of Missouri
-     Inability to meet terms related to the bond covenant forbearance agreement
LEGAL SECURITY
The 2020 bonds are an obligation of CRMC, secured by unrestricted gross revenues pursuant to CRMC's Master Trust Indenture. While the University of Missouri-Columbia Medical Alliance is the sole member and controlling entity of CRMC, neither the University nor the University of Missouri Health System are obligated on CRMC bonds.
The privately placed 2017 bonds (unrated) are also secured by unrestricted gross revenues, pursuant to CRMC's Master Trust Indenture.
PROFILE
Capital Region Medical Center is a 114 bed hospital, two campus hospital system, located in Jefferson City, MO, the capital of Missouri. The system operates numerous medical clinics and outpatient facilities throughout the surrounding eight county area.
METHODOLOGY
The principal methodology used in this rating was Not-For-Profit Healthcare published in December 2018 and available at https://ratings.moodys.com/rmc-documents/70886. Alternatively, please see the Rating Methodologies page on https://ratings.moodys.com for a copy of this methodology.
